[00:00:00 - 00:01:00] | B. Berthon | Good morning. My name is Bruno Berthon. I run Accenture Strategy in Europe, Africa and Latin America. I am very happy to be here at the Forum for the first time in the superb city of St. Petersburg. My role is to try to manage this group of ten speakers so that we get through the questions in about an hour and allow the audience to ask a few questions. Obviously, the topic is around technology. You can see the title of the discussion is “The Coming Industrial Revolution”, and we are going to start with the definition of what the World Economic Forum calls the Fourth Industrial Revolution. The second part is the impact on competitiveness and employment. I have an amazing panel. I am not going to introduce all of them because that would take half of the time, but they are covering technologies and both new and more traditional industries like Russian Railways, and they are very international in terms of their origin and the type of business as well. I think that should make a great conversation. We have three questions we are going to cover. First is a view of the spectrum of technologies and the ones that are the most relevant for the different industries or regions at the moment. Second, we are going to talk about skills: what the new skills are and how you can develop those skills, and in particular what it means for Europe or for Russia. The third question, which is slightly more political, is a little bit more about productivity and the impact of technology on employment in general. As you probably know, from an economist’s standpoint, half of the world thinks that this is going to be a disaster for job creation in the future, and the other half – or at least the economists – think it is actually going to be a great opportunity. As we say, everyone is looking for a one-handed economist, because otherwise they always say, “On the one hand… on the other hand”, which is a big problem. We will see what the panel has to say about that. To get started, we have the chance to have the World Economic Forum with us today. As I said, they coined the expression, “The Fourth Industrial Revolution”, and that was the theme of Davos 2016. I would like to ask Mr. Sönmez from the WEF to start. The clock is ticking.
[00:01:00 - 00:02:00] | M. Sönmez | Good morning, Bruno. Good morning, everyone. As you said, the Fourth Industrial Revolution was the theme of our annual meeting in Davos this year. The impact of technology is not new. We have seen it as the world transitioned from farming to industrialization, and then to computerization. What is different this time, we feel, is its size, complexity and speed, all enabled, empowered and amplified by the connectivity of people and things that the Internet provides. What is happening in one part of the world can have a dramatic and unexpected impact in another, in a totally different industry. My personal experience in this area was seven years ago. Before I joined the Forum, I was in Silicon Valley for 25 years, and my company was a partner of the World Economic Forum. I was attending the World Economic Forum’s annual event on science, technology, and innovation, which takes place in China, and I saw this little thing called a 3D printer. I asked a researcher what it was. She told me that she was printing a plastic toy, but, in the future, when my car broke down, I would go to a mechanic with my car, and the mechanic would 3D-print the car part that needed to be replaced and have it available. That can have a profound impact on the supply chain. If you can 3D-print a car part, you do not have to manufacture it. You do not have to distribute it, so it can have a totally disruptive impact in multiple areas. In Davos this year, I had a delicious pancake breakfast. At least, it was delicious until I was told that the pancake was 3D-printed! We also saw 3D-printed human liver tissue. So this is real. It is going to impact multiple industries. The definition of industries is changing, and the demarcation lines are blurring as well. The impact is not confined to a single industry or region; it is systemic, and one company, one industry association, one government, one ministry, or one international organization cannot address it alone. What is needed is a horizontal, multi-stakeholder, impact-oriented approach, and that is why, as a platform for public-private cooperation, we embarked on this Fourth Industrial Revolution theme. We should also not forget the 4 billion people without access to the Internet in the world. We should also not forget the 1.5 billion people without access to electricity. Whatever we do, it has to be socially inclusive, which I think we will cover in this panel as well. Finally, with half of the world’s population under 35, the youth also need to have a seat at the table. That is why we launched fourteen systems initiatives in Davos, ranging from shaping the future of financial and monitoring systems, shaping the future of energy, shaping the future of production, the digital transformation of industries – on which, Bruno, we are working with your colleagues at Accenture – and also economic growth, social inclusion, and, finally, in my view, the most important one: shaping the future of education, skills, and gender.
[00:02:00 - 00:03:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you very much, Mr. Sönmez. Obviously, that research is public and accessible to all of you. Let us move to my neighbour: Markus Borchert from Nokia.
[00:03:00 - 00:04:00] | M. Borchert | To comment a little bit on the technology side, enabling this Fourth Industrial Revolution, many people also talk a lot about the so-called Internet of Things. In this context, connectivity is a key enabler and, as such, the telecoms industry is a key enabler for making this industrial revolution and Internet of Things a reality. Now, in this context, with the next generation – what people refer to as 5G – it is not just another mobile standard and higher data rates, which, yes, it will also bring. But the important thing is that this technology will enable a myriad of new use cases, because it also brings new capabilities for new applications, for example reducing latency to ultra-low levels of milliseconds. This will then allow use cases like, for example, the connected car or automated driving, or remote operations and so on in digital health. It also enables battery lives of ten years, which allows us, for example, to put many sensors into the ground and enable billions of object sensors and machines to be connected. Then, of course, you put the software, the analytics and all that on top, and that will be the transformative force. In that sense, we are looking towards a really exciting future. As a matter of fact, it is not just an industrial revolution, because it will not only transform industry, it will essentially transform all sectors of our lives: how we live, how we train or get educated, how we communicate with each other, and so on. Here, as a telecom company, it is extremely important that we accelerate laying the foundation for this brave new world of the Internet of Things and the next Industrial Revolution, because this is the foundation for innovation to happen. Innovation will then happen very much in ecosystems. In the future, we have to think a lot more in terms of ecosystems, whether it is automotive, digital health, industry, and so on. Here, we also need to see that different regions of the world are competing with each other in terms of how fast we are getting there, and ultimately where is the best platform to drive investment and innovation. Here in Russia and in Europe in general, I think we do have a great opportunity enabled by technology, but we also have to recognize that we need to speed up to really maximize this opportunity and make sure that investment and innovation is happening in our part of the world.
[00:04:00 - 00:05:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you, Mr. Borchert. Speaking of innovation, we are going to move to one of our Russian speakers, Valentin Gapanovich, who is Senior Vice-President for Innovation Development at Russian Railways.
[00:05:00 - 00:06:00] | В. Гапанович | Как всем известно, железная дорога — это достаточно консервативная отрасль. Но раз тема посвящена новой индустриальной революции, я коротко скажу, что для нас, российских железнодорожников, является индустриальной революцией. Это такие проекты, как использование сжиженного природного газа в качестве моторного топлива на газотурбинных локомотивах. Уже завтра мы подпишем большой контракт на реализацию этого крайне интересного инновационного проекта. Для нас новая индустриальная революция — это и впервые организованное движение без смены тележек между Москвой и Берлином, которое будет осуществлено в этом году: через пограничную станцию Брест мы поедем уже без смены тележек. Это новая прорывная технология, объединяющая две наши колеи: узкую европейскую и широкую российскую. Индустриальная революция — это 250 000 персональных компьютеров, которые сегодня есть в компании. Это четыре миллиона ежесуточно обрабатываемых сообщений в наших IT-центрах, 16 ЦОД, которые разбросаны по всей территории Российской Федерации. В эту секунду находятся в движении ровно 7 500 грузовых, пассажирских и пригородных поездов. Все это движется одновременно между Южно-Сахалинском и Калининградом и нуждается в управлении. Вот что для нас сегодня IT-технологии. И наверное, не зря в нашей новой концепции развития «Российских железных дорог» до 2023 года мы себе обозначили проект «Цифровая железная дорога». Интернет вещей для нас — уже не какой-то лозунг, а реализуемые проекты. Пока они еще в начальной стадии, но это уже работает и уже сегодня есть в «РЖД». Это совмещение IT-технологий и тех старых традиционных технологий, с которыми вы сталкиваетесь как пассажиры. Это совмещение нового и прорывного с нашим достаточно консервативным колесом, которому уже много веков. Вот что для нас новая индустриальная революция. Спасибо.
[00:06:00 - 00:07:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you very much, Mr. Gapanovich, particularly for getting the train on time. Let us move to an oddity on the panel, who is Terence O’Rourke from Enterprise Ireland.
[00:07:00 - 00:08:00] | T. O’Rourke | Thank you, Bruno. I am Chairman of Enterprise Ireland, which is a government agency, and our job is to try to help Irish-headquartered companies become more innovative and more successful at adopting new technologies and making a bigger impact on the world. Ireland, a small country, needs to export to sustain its population and to grow. Ireland is interesting, because we never had an Industrial Revolution in Ireland. Ireland had no coal and no iron ore, so we never went through it. We have no heavy industry in Ireland at all. In 1970, Ireland was a largely agricultural country where the GDP per capita was about 70% of the average of the European community. Today, Ireland has 145% of the average GDP per capita of the European community, the second highest in the EU after Luxembourg. The reason we have done that in Ireland is because of the government policies encouraging foreign direct investment and encouraging people to work in, I suppose, the “Third Revolution”. Ireland is, for example, the largest exporter of computer services in the world. Thirteen percent of the world’s computer services are exported from Ireland. That is obviously largely reflective of the fact that we are the European base and headquarters for companies like Accenture, as well as Google, Apple, and Microsoft. They all have their European headquarters in Ireland, so we are very successful in that area. What we in the Irish government agency want to do is drive Irish companies to learn the new technologies. As we face the Fourth Industrial Revolution, I just want to share with you a number of areas where we are focusing on helping Irish companies adapt to the new world. As I said, in 1970, we were a largely agricultural country. That means that we are very good at farming. Ireland lies in the temperate zone, we have lots of green grass, and all our cattle are all fed on grass, not on grain, so it is very high-quality milk and very high-quality beef. But these days, we need to be more productive and more innovative in the food area. The world has a lot more people to feed. In Ireland, we are helping that in a couple of ways. One is a small Irish company called Dairymaster. You heard Mr. Borchert talk about the connected car. Dairymaster is about the connected cow, a cow which has its own iPad, and the farmer can work out exactly how the cow is doing in milking terms, in feeding terms, and health terms. Its health, its milk output, and the quality of its milk output are completely monitored on an iPad for the farmer. The farmer sees how each individual animal is doing, and then helping the animal do things like milk itself, so there are new skills required. There will not be too many people milking cows anymore; it is all done by machine now, and the cows can basically manage the whole process themselves. An innovative Irish company called Dairymaster is now exporting very well and growing business in Russia. I should say that Enterprise Ireland has an office in Moscow, as we have in many countries of the world, helping Irish companies export and bring their innovations to new markets. Another company in Ireland that I want to talk about is Kerry, which is a food company in whole ingredients and flavours. They now have 1,000 people working in a new research centre in Ireland. They help people put together new foods. If you want a barbeque pork-flavoured ice cream, or a low-fat, high-gluten something or other, they come in and they can work with you. They have all the technologies there to deconstruct all the foods and help companies work out consumer tastes and products by getting the best ingredients, working out the science behind them, and then helping people eat better. Those are the kinds of technologies that Ireland is working on. It is also strong in financial services and strong in medical devices, as well. Fintech, agtech, and medtech: they are the technologies that we are strong on, where we are trying to work out how we can gear people up for the new age.
[00:08:00 - 00:09:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you, Mr. O’Rourke. We are all looking forward to a 3D-printed Guinness after this session! We are going to move to another company that has a great title: Cognitive Technologies. Ms. Uskova, if you want to talk a bit about your technologies.
[00:09:00 - 00:10:00] | О. Ускова | Добрый день. Cognitive Technologies — это российская компания, которая производит роботизированные системы для всех видов беспилотного наземного транспорта. Фактически мы производим искусственные глаза и мозг, то есть hardware и программное обеспечение, которые позволяют объекту становиться субъектом. Мы сейчас говорим не о каком-то далеком будущем, а об индустриальном плане на ближайшие десять лет, который реализуется во всем мире, и в том числе в России в рамках Национальной технологической инициативы AutoNet. Речь идет о том, что в течение следующих десяти лет будет произведен практически полный переход на беспилотное автономное вождение в разных секторах: в промышленности, в сельском хозяйстве, в грузовом и легковом транспорте. Сейчас открыто великое соревнование ученых и промышленников. Все крупные автомобильные компании объявили в своих планах переход на беспилотники. Мы говорим о росте этого рынка как минимум на 28% в год. То есть идет повальная интеллектуализация транспорта, которая по сути своего влияния на изменения в обществе может сравниться с переходом от лошади к автомобилю. Теперь это будет переход от машины, управляемой человеком, к роботу. Это влечет за собой целый спектр очень серьезных изменений: правил дорожного движения, моральных вопросов, боязни использования роботов, вопросов безопасности, террористической угрозы, когда роботы начинают использоваться как оружие. Перед миром стоит очень серьезный вопрос. Робот уже сейчас намного эффективнее человека. Когда мы ставим робота на комбайн (у нас есть такой проект с сельским хозяйством), то уровень производительности комбайна вырастает в три раза. Человек не может конкурировать. Как только будет введена полная роботизация сельскохозяйственных компаний, жестко поменяется вся структура работающих на селе. Мы должны задуматься о трудоустройстве этих людей, об их переучивании и о том, чтобы человеческая раса через двадцать лет не исчезла под давлением новой расы роботов, которых мы сами же создаем. Спасибо.
[00:10:00 - 00:11:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you very much, Ms. Uskova. We are going to finish with Mr. Hoechbauer from SAP and Mr. Brobst.
[00:11:00 - 00:12:00] | S. Hoechbauer | Thank you. I think everybody certainly agrees that the digital transformation or business transformation offers a huge and immense opportunity for new, disruptive technologies and also business models. We in SAP believe that it is, in the same way, important to talk about the employees and the workforce of today. We think that the digital transformation will also radically change the structure and the profile of the professions we see today. Think about autonomous vehicles, driving without a driver. According to studies, this will impact almost 10% of the US workforce. Imagine that. We think that skilled employees will be the number one topic to drive a successful digital transformation. According to PwC, 75% of Russian CEOs today confirm that the deficit of skilled employees and skilled people is the number one risk factor in their business. We think that the only way to overcome that and the only way to support the changing workforce and requirements is to offer cloud- based human capital management systems which not only allow recruitment, development, and retention of employees, but also drive very successful workforce transformations and reorganizations of companies. It is all about workforce agility. It is having the right people with the right skills on the right tasks without losing any efficiency and effectiveness. We think that workforce agility is driven by cloud-based human capital management platforms, and workforce agility is also a very key, important topic to drive successful digital transformation. Thank you.
[00:12:00 - 00:13:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you, Mr. Hoechbauer. We will remember that: workforce agility. We will come back to that in the second question. To finish this first question, Mr. Brobst from Teradata will speak on this topic.
[00:13:00 - 00:14:00] | S. Brobst | I am Stephen Brobst. I am the Chief Technology Officer for Teradata. We are the global leader in big data analytics, so we are the people that take the data from the cows and from the railways and so on, and then analyse it and figure out what to do with it. In Silicon Valley, where I am from, we have a saying: “All st companies in the 21 century either are data companies, will be data companies, or will be extinct”. Those are the only three choices. When we look at the Fourth Industrial Revolution and where we are going, it is actually not about manufacturing physical things anymore. It is not about the hardware. It is about the software and the services and the exploitation of data. It is about instrumenting the things that we manufacture, capturing the data, allowing those things to self-report on their own performance, allowing us to externally control those things, and allowing us, as added value, to continue to enhance those capabilities with advanced analytics. I will give an example of a project that we are doing jointly with Siemens. It relates to the discussion from Mr. Gapanovich on the railway business. We have this project we call the “Internet of Trains”. The reality is, people do not want to buy trains. People want to buy transportation capability between Point A and Point B in an efficient way. They want to be on time, they want to be able to move the people efficiently, they want safety; they want all of these things. We are working together with Siemens: we provide the analytics, Siemens runs the show. In this implementation, for example, in the intra-country transportation in medium to longer distances, for one of the places where we implemented this capability, there was a time when 80% of the people travelling travelled by plane. We then put into place a capability and said, actually, we are going to use analytics to run the railway system more efficiently. We are going to run the trains on time, and we are going to guarantee those trains are going to be on time. In fact, if the train is more than 15 minutes late, your trip is free. We converted those 80% of people travelling by plane; 70% of people travelling are now travelling by train. We did that not because we manufactured faster trains per se, but rather we manufactured smarter software, smarter analytics, to allow those trains to run more efficiently. We take sensor data off those trains. We instrument everything. We instrument the ball bearings in the train to understand the heat, to understand when we’re going to intervene with proactive maintenance. We instrument when the trains are coming into the station and when they are leaving the station, and we can reschedule dynamically, all based on analytics from that sensor data. Our job is to take the data and translate that data into value by monetizing the Internet of Things.
[00:14:00 - 00:15:00] | B. Berthon | Trains arriving on time; I think that is great news. You have also heard about connected cars and connected mobility. Probably more news here is connected agriculture, the power of “smart”, and software. All of that requires new skills, new talent, and potentially new people. Our second question is really to understand the impact of technology on skills. I am going to start with Robert Urazov, who runs the WorldSkills NGO here in Russia.
[00:15:00 - 00:16:00] | Р. Уразов | Большое спасибо. Для россиян очень интересен перевод названия панельной сессии. Если по- английски это «вклад в конкуренцию и в занятость», то российский вариант звучит более толерантно: «новая индустриальная революция». Это неспроста. Мы хорошо понимаем, что сейчас под маркетинговым мемом «Индустрия 4.0» нас ожидает критически-драматическое увеличение производительности труда. И фактически в ближайшие несколько лет мы будем решать две задачи. Первая — как вырастить тех людей, которые будут работать в Индустрии 4.0, а вторая — что делать со всеми остальными, которые остались за ее бортом. Я полностью согласен с предыдущим спикером. Сейчас речь идет не о том, как произвести что-то в смысле hardware, а о том, как создать продукт. Если мы говорим об Индустрии 4.0, то очевидно, что даже при отсутствии технологических стандартов существуют компетенции и skills, которые точно туда войдут. В WorldSkills мы проводим конкурсы рабочих и инженерных профессий, и мы понимаем, куда сейчас все это движется. Например, что касается Индустрии 4.0, в этом году мы впервые в мире будем проводить на чемпионате в Екатеринбурге эксперимент с промышленными компаниями и теми людьми, которые там работают. Мы выделили для себя несколько компетенций, которые точно появятся. Во-первых, это умение работать с сенсорикой: любой современный завод в Индустрии 4.0 сам себя анализирует, сам себе диагност и сам себе врач. Следующее — это умение работать с промышленной робототехникой. Понятно, что на этом заводе человека не будет вообще, потому что ему там нечего делать, он просто проиграет в конкурентной борьбе. Далее — умение программировать, создавать вещи, работающие в среде Internet of Things. Это программирование (в основном, на базе Arduino) любых продуктов, которые находятся на этом заводе и как средства производства, и как конечные изделия. Это умение интегрировать все элементы завода в единую сеть. Сейчас в компаниях есть системный администратор, который соединяет вместе компьютеры, телекоммуникационную сеть, видео и так далее. Этот системный администратор перерастет в некоего администратора завода, который будет объединять все имеющееся умное оборудование в единую сеть, заставляя его грамотно работать. Но главная компетенция, которая будет критически необходима и критически важна для конкурентоспособности организации, страны и человека вообще, — это так называемое мейкерство. Оно будет состоять из двух вещей. С одной стороны, человек должен будет уметь создавать очень хорошие цифровые 3D-модели. Весь мир идет к тому, что любую штуку, которую мы сейчас видим, мы рано или поздно будем описывать в виде 3D- модели. А второе — это умение создавать. Является ли умение создавать skill’ом — вот на какой вопрос нам следует ответить. А что делать со всеми, кто не обладает соответствующими компетенциями, — это вопрос для дальнейшего обсуждения. Спасибо.
[00:16:00 - 00:17:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you very much, Mr. Urazov. We are going to move to Mr. Benedetti in a more traditional manufacturing industry. What is your view, and how are you looking for new skills for Danieli?
[00:17:00 - 00:18:00] | G. Benedetti | Good day. We are in a traditional activity, producing metals such as steel, copper, and aluminium. The Fourth Industrial Revolution will certainly increase productivity. It means better plant utilization and zero men on the floor, and this will have an impact. We will have an increase in productivity per man of 60–100% in the existing plants by implementing those new technologies. The impact will be higher in new plants, where we expect an increase in productivity of 100–200% at least. Of course, this will create overcapacity in other kinds of production, which we estimate at about 30–35%. That means shutting down several plants that are not competitive. That will be the result in our activity. Regarding new jobs, of course we have already started to train engineers that we call digital metallurgists. That means that we need to automate the process. We need data scientists, and in our opinion, this will require a stronger cooperation with the school system: more laboratories, more practical things, more doing things. By doing things, we find that the students are more motivated to pursue their studies. It is a revolution.
[00:18:00 - 00:19:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you, Mr. Benedetti. Let us move to Ms. Uskova. What kind of skills do you need to produce robots? Do you use robots to produce robots, or do you still need some people and human skills?
[00:19:00 - 00:20:00] | О. Ускова | Думаю, это дело ближайших 20 лет, если брать прогнозы по развитию искусственного интеллекта — мы занимаемся системами глубокого обучения (deep learning systems) и так далее. Я хочу сказать, что через 20 лет или, может быть, раньше робот уже будет производить робота. Динамика непредсказуема. Мы просчитались в скорости развития беспилотных автомобилей где-то на три года, мы думали, что все пойдет медленнее. Поэтому, может быть, не 20, а 15 лет. Приношу извинения аудитории за некоторый возврат в 50-е годы прошлого столетия, но я обращусь к Айзеку Азимову и трем правилам робототехники. Мы должны принять некую систему ограничений, которые искусственно введут порядок взаимодействия и производства. Может быть, на каком-то этапе нам нужно будет всем дружно остановиться и перестать двигаться в этом направлении. Я думаю, что в развитии робототехники это должно напоминать систему сдерживания, как при работе над ядерным оружием.
[00:20:00 - 00:21:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you, Ms. Uskova. We will have to invent robots on strike, if robots are producing robots. Let us move to Acronis. Mr. Protassov, if you want to jump in?
[00:21:00 - 00:22:00] | С. Протасов | Доброе утро. Новая индустриальная революция как открывает новые возможности, так и создает какой-то набор проблем. Но я бы хотел сказать о другом — о производительности труда и о том, что новые технологии могут для нее сделать. Наша компания по разработке программного обеспечения родом из России, но у нас есть офисы в 17 странах мира. Мы продаем ПО всему миру, и один из наших крупных офисов находится в Сингапуре. Раньше это был исключительно бизнес-офис, но теперь там находится небольшой инженерный центр, и сингапурское правительство очень хочет, чтобы мы его растили. В частности, потому что сингапурское правительство хочет быть производителем новых технологий. Зачем им это нужно? Сингапур — удивительная страна. Они достаточно быстро росли в последние десять лет, со средним темпом 5—6%, но при этом у них есть несколько проблем. Во-первых, долго выдерживать такой рост тяжело, особенно когда нация становится богатой. Во-вторых, на сегодняшний день вклад новых технологий в эти 5% составляет примерно 0,5%. Кроме того, сейчас они столкнулись с проблемой старения населения. Пятнадцать лет назад на одного пенсионера у них приходилось восемь трудоспособных граждан. Сегодня их пять, а через 15 лет будет только двое. И они не могут решить свою проблему, например, завозом иностранной рабочей силы. У них просто нет земли. Поэтому они намерены сделать ставку на новые технологии. Для этого была создана государственная программа под названием Smart Nation. Эта программа позволит объединить данные из всех возможных источников. Это промышленные датчики, видеокамеры, умные часы и телефоны, которые носят в карманах граждане, и так далее. Благодаря объединению данных, внедрению новых технологий и построению квалифицированной рабочей силы (например, у них три университета, и два из них входят в топ-20 мировых) они считают, что в следующие десять лет смогут выдерживать рост экономики на 4%. Из них 2% будет обеспечено за счет внедрения новых технологий и перехода на новый экономический уклад. Это, конечно, потрясающие цифры, но я думаю, что для многих стран, особенно тех, где резервы повышения производительности труда намного больше, результаты могут быть еще выше. Спасибо.
[00:22:00 - 00:23:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you, Mr. Protassov. As part of those new jobs, we talk a lot about data scientists. Maybe Mr. Brobst from Teradata can shed light on this kind of new profile.
[00:23:00 - 00:24:00] | S. Brobst | Absolutely. It is interesting that the title of data scientist did not even exist ten years ago. LinkedIn is a Teradata customer, so we get to look at their data cooperatively, and this is now one of the fastest-growing job titles in the tech industry. There is an interesting article in the Harvard Business Review that refers to data science as the ”sexiest job of the 21st century”. It is interesting that the requirements of a data scientist are not the same as a computer scientist. They are not actually programmers. They are people that have a deep understanding of mathematics. They can build models for prediction. They can run experiments. They know how sample data. They know the difference between causation and correlation, but they are inherently curious people. Initially, people recruited them from mathematics and statistics backgrounds, but increasingly you have to branch out further than that. What we find is, if you look at them, they are people that come from the hard sciences, people that know how to design experiments and collect data, that are not afraid of technology, but are not technologists. This is a very good recruiting ground for these skill sets. If you look at the exploitation of data, the main issue in exploiting data is not technology. The main issue in exploiting data is the skill sets necessary to understand what that data means. Universities and government organizations and industry have to make much bigger investments in building these skill sets among these people. Not technical people, but people that know how to design experiments and analyse the results of those experiments; this is the data science role.
[00:24:00 - 00:25:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you, Mr. Brobst. That is good news about how to leverage experience to interpret data. There is some hope in there. To finish our tour, what about the software industry?
[00:25:00 - 00:26:00] | S. Hoechbauer | I already touched on the importance of skilled employees. This is critical in order to drive business and workforce transformation. Think about a traditional business we heard a lot about today: the railway business. If you are in the business like my partner next to me, certainly, this is a very traditional business. If you are going to digitalize a very traditional business, it will massively impact how you create skills, how you train, and how you educate your employees and transition your workforce. Again, we think the only way to do this is to have flexible, cloud-based tools and technology which not only allow you to manage, educate, and train your employees and to assign them to the right task, but also to have full transparency in your total enterprise resource planning system. That is, I think, important in order to be flexible. Thank you.
[00:26:00 - 00:27:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you. We have seen some of the positive or exciting consequences of technology. There is obviously a bit of a political question around the impact of productivity on jobs, which Mr. Benedetti was talking about. Let us have a little bit of that discussion around the social impact of technologies. I will start with Mr. Borchert from Nokia.
[00:27:00 - 00:28:00] | M. Borchert | I think in the discussion so far, we have clearly heard that we are going to face a significant structural change. Mr. Benedetti was talking about it with productivity potentially creating an overcapacity, which then would have to be adjusted. On the other hand, I am more on the positive side, because I see a tremendous opportunity in the digital sector. We have faced such changes in each industrial revolution that we have gone through in the past centuries, and each time for the good. Each time, it has created growth, more wealth, and more prosperity for people. I do not see why or how it should be different this time. Talking about the structural changes, we are even seeing that within the tech sector, Nokia, for example, is now investing a lot more in software such as data analytics and advanced algorithms. Ten years ago, half of our R&D workforce was still on hardware; now it is less than 10%. Within that time, we have seen a profound structural change. Also, together with our partner, we also are capturing opportunity and innovating here in Russia. We have invested more than RUB 300 million in building a global service delivery centre in Voronezh. We are working with MTS on 5G and IoT, and are innovating together and bringing the benefits here to Russia. We are working with the Skolkovo Foundation on creating or orchestrating ecosystems around the Internet of Things and what we call mobile computing, which means a much more distributed architecture of data centres, which we will need to achieve these ultra-low latencies. This means that the distribution of intelligence has to be totally different going forward. That, again, is a big opportunity. I am more an optimist. I think there is a structural change, but I think it will create more opportunities than problems.
[00:28:00 - 00:29:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you. Mr. Borchert distributed manufacturing as a solution. Let us move to Mr. Gapanovich. If I am correct, Russian Railways employs 700,000 people, so I guess the productivity question is quite significant.
[00:29:00 - 00:30:00] | В. Гапанович | В начале сессии мой коллега Штефан высказал очень важную мысль. Я считаю, что кроме цифровых технологий, которые, безусловно, важны, на первом месте все-таки стоит управление человеческим капиталом. Это главное. Может быть, для нашей компании с 700 000 работников вопрос сокращения численности персонала стоит не так остро, хотя могу привести один пример. За три года мы сократили численность работников по ремонту пути на 10 000 человек — с 91 000 до 81 000. Но появились новые профессии: программисты для машин, которые обслуживают путь, специалисты в области электроники. У людей, которые у нас сегодня работают, уже принципиально другой уровень. В этой связи для нас как для инфраструктурной компании очень важно выстроить систему управления человеческим капиталом. Мы ежегодно направляем в высшие учебные заведения восемь тысяч человек. Для нас важно, чтобы из вуза выходил специалист. Да, важен бакалавр, магистр, но в первую очередь специалист, «айтишник», управленец. Мы ежегодно готовим в наших центрах 53 000 человек. У нас 65 центров от Южно- Сахалинска до Калининграда. Мы переподготавливаем 150 000 человек, повышаем уровень их квалификации. Для компании важно выстроить систему управления человеческим капиталом так, чтобы рост производительности труда и естественное снижение численности были сбалансированы перераспределением. Наверное, нам это делать проще. Сегодня мы можем спокойно перераспределить работников из Европейской части России, где трудоспособного населения достаточно, на Дальний Восток, где есть определенный дефицит. И мы этим занимаемся. Мы не отправляем людей на улицу, они продолжают у нас работать за счет такого географического перемещения. Я бы поставил управление человеческим капиталом на первое место в любой компании, будь она такая же крупная, как наша, или меньше. Спасибо.
[00:30:00 - 00:31:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you very much Valentin. Stanislav, what’s your point of view on the social impact of technology?
[00:31:00 - 00:32:00] | С. Протасов | Я бы хотел сказать об одном интересном аспекте, который сейчас хорошо виден в нашей индустрии, а в традиционных пока не очень виден: рынок труда становится глобальным. В начале 90-х годов, когда я заканчивал вуз, российскому студенту поступить на работу в зарубежную компанию в Америке было невозможно. Не было средств связи. Какое-то время назад появился интернет, электронная почта, люди начали рассылать резюме. Сейчас рекрутеры приезжают прямо в Москву. Amazon, например, высадила здесь рекрутеров, прошлась по российскому рынку и каких-то людей увезла. Кроме того, меняется система управления инженерами, и не только ими. Большое количество людей в мире начинают работать удаленно. Общество каким-то образом умеет из удаленных работников получать вполне хорошие команды. Я думаю, что достаточно скоро вопрос работы не будет определяться страной. Рынок труда станет глобальным. Из IT эта тенденция распространится и на традиционные отрасли. И это достаточно сильные изменения. Неожиданно многие компании в традиционных сферах будут вынуждены соревноваться не между собой в России, а на глобальном рынке, потому что в противном случае их работники перейдут в зарубежные компании, где эффективность выше. Я не до конца понимаю, к чему это приведет, но я думаю, что это случится очень быстро. Штефан говорил про облачные системы. В каком-то виде они начнут появляться для управления человеческим капиталом и талантом сначала в hi-tech-индустриях, а потом везде. Спасибо.
[00:32:00 - 00:33:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you, Stanislav. Mr. O’Rourke, a question for you: how do you transform a country of potatoes and farmers into a high-tech leader in Europe?
[00:33:00 - 00:34:00] | T. O’Rourke | With a variety of strategies. One of the things the government did was focus on foreign direct investment, making it attractive for companies to come to Ireland, and that obviously helped. There was a tax piece of that, but there was very importantly an education piece of that as well, making sure that the people coming out of our colleges and our universities were people that had the skills for the new age: technology people, people who could code, and people who could run the software. All the technology jobs have been built very successfully in Ireland. The other thing the government has done quite a lot of is trying to make sure that the people who like doing research – there are some people who like putting on their white coats and going into the laboratories or the universities and doing research – do not really worry about commercialization or business. There are people who like building businesses, but you have got to connect those people together. You have to connect the researchers with the businesspeople, and that is a government job, I think, because it will not happen naturally. Universities will not naturally do it, and business will not naturally understand how to speak to universities. Making sure that ecosystem works and getting the innovations out of the laboratories, out of the researchers, and into the marketplace, into what people want in terms of services and products, is a very important part of it as well.
[00:34:00 - 00:35:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you, Mr. O’Rourke. Mr. Benedetti, you represent the type of industry where I think the politicians are the most scared in general. How do you play that responsibility socially around the world where you have your manufacturing capacities?
[00:35:00 - 00:36:00] | G. Benedetti | The question is not easy because, as I said before, we will probably need less than half the people than today to produce the same quantities. But let me say, in some countries, this will be a positive thing because, as we know, the birth rate in some countries is negative or quite low. The number of working people is decreasing year by year, so the possibility of increasing productivity and GDP per person will allow countries to pay out pension services for older people.
[00:36:00 - 00:37:00] | B. Berthon | It is a new form of wealth creation where you do not need jobs to create the wealth, so that is a positive outcome of productivity. Let us finish on that question with Mr. Urazov and the point of view of WorldSkills, as you are developing both skills for the old economy and traditional industries as well as for new industries and new technologies.
[00:37:00 - 00:38:00] | Р. Уразов | Понятно, что людей нужно все меньше и меньше для того, чтобы производить все больше и больше. Чем же будут заниматься все остальные? С нашей точки зрения, правительства стран должны ориентировать их на то, чтобы они занимались двумя вещами. Во-первых, это услуги, которые оказываются человеком человеку. Мы понимаем, что традиционный ресторан не пропадет никогда, потому что человек приходит туда не поесть, а получить некое впечатление. И это не может быть ни автоматизировано, ни роботизировано. Во-вторых, творчество. Любая рутинная операция, которая выполняется по определенному алгоритму, рано или поздно будет автоматизирована, касается ли это управления транспортом, диагностики болезней или анализа больших данных. Машина эффективнее человека, рано или поздно она его оттуда обязательно вытеснит. Но в чем она не сможет его вытеснить, так это в понимании данных. Это вещи, связанные с творчеством и созданием неких ценностей не для прибавочного продукта, а для удовлетворения потребностей, которые в пирамиде Маслоу расположены выше, чем физические или социальные. Звучит достаточно утопично, тем не менее, судя по экспериментам многих стран с введением безусловного дохода, мы к этому идем. Нужно учить людей коллаборации и творчеству — создавать и трудиться вместе.
[00:38:00 - 00:39:00] | B. Berthon | Skills of collaboration, creativity, and expertise field by field. Thank you to the panel. To finish, I have asked them to answer in 30 seconds with a tweet. You will see there are tweet walls around the Forum, actually supported by Accenture. Each of them will answer the question about being pessimistic or optimistic about both the productivity and the social impact of technologies. Thirty seconds, starting with Mr. Brobst on my left, and then we will go one by one across the panel.
[00:39:00 - 00:40:00] | S. Brobst | I am quite optimistic for two reasons. The first reason is that, in this new world, data is the thing that we are going to monetize, and data is reusable, whereas physical assets are not, so we get much more leverage. The second point, leveraging on the previous speaker, is leverage of human creativity. This cannot be replaced. In order to get new value from data, we need to leverage creativity. I think we have it wrong in the education system. We talk about STEM: science, technology, engineering and mathematics. It is really STEAM. The ”art” part is very important, and that cannot be replaced by humans. That creativity, combined with the reusable asset of data, is absolutely critical.
[00:40:00 - 00:41:00] | B. Berthon | A great tweet: “from STEM to STEAM”. Mr. Protassov.
[00:41:00 - 00:42:00] | С. Протасов | Я очень оптимистичен, потому что за то время, которое я занимаюсь программным обеспечением, количество ресурсов для выполнения всех задач в мире в нашей области постоянно отстает от роста количества задач. Я думаю, что креативной работы будет становиться больше и что новые технологии дают в нашей жизни положительный эффект. Спасибо.
[00:42:00 - 00:43:00] | S. Hoechenbauer | We are very optimistic about the opportunity that comes along with digital transformation and the positive impact it will have on workforce agility.
[00:43:00 - 00:44:00] | B. Berthon | An impact on workforce agility, thank you.
[00:44:00 - 00:45:00] | В. Гапанович | Я умеренно оптимистичен, потому что достаточно профессионально занимаюсь управлением рисками. В этих суперсовременных технологиях в меня вселяет не беспокойство, но определенное опасение такой простой элемент, как кибербезопасность. Я все время задаю вопрос своему другу Сергею Когогину, генеральному директору «КАМАЗ»: «А ты не боишься, что твоим „КАМАЗом“ могут управлять не из Набережных Челнов, а откуда-то из другого места?» Пока ответа нет, поэтому я с умеренным оптимизмом отношусь к такому современному направлению, как новая индустриальная революция. Хотя мы этим занимаемся и будем заниматься.
[00:45:00 - 00:46:00] | M. Borchert | I think it will be hard for you to find a pessimist on this panel, actually. I am also on the optimistic side. I truly believe that this Fourth Industrial Revolution, IoT or the Internet of Things, represents a huge opportunity. Analysts say that this alone will add about 7% to global GDP growth, so it is really massive. I also want to put a bit of water into our wine. The question is: where is this going to happen? As Mr. Protassov pointed out, the job market is global, so where is the job creation and the innovation going to happen? For us, in Europe, to lead in IoT, we need an Internet everywhere to connect to, and that is where we need to speed up. In that context, we should accept potholes in our roads rather than coverage holes in our networks.
[00:46:00 - 00:47:00] | B. Berthon | IoT for GDP without holes. Mr. Benedetti.
[00:47:00 - 00:48:00] | G. Benedetti | I think that we should be optimistic because, at the end of the day, the average quality of life will be improved.
[00:48:00 - 00:49:00] | B. Berthon | A positive human impact. Mr. O’Rourke. An Irish person has to be an optimist, right?
[00:49:00 - 00:50:00] | T. O’Rourke | We are always looking on the bright side of life. But it is difficult, because you are looking at a world where there are going to be hundreds of billions of jobs gone in terms of drivers, truck drivers, logistics warehouse workers, and customer service operatives. All those jobs are going to go in the next ten years. We are going to have a lot more time on our hands, and what are we going to do with that? We will also need a lot more creativity in design. I would have used the STEAM and STEM, but Mr. Brobst got in before me. I think that is really the opportunity here to adapt things. It will not be mass production anymore; it will be customized production. Everybody will be able to have their own phone, their own way, and there will be great opportunity for design and creativity skills. I am optimistic about this new world of abundance and technological change.
[00:50:00 - 00:51:00] | B. Berthon | I have to say, from a French perspective, your idea for 3D cooking is not something that I am going to be looking forward to! Ms. Uskova.
[00:51:00 - 00:52:00] | О. Ускова | У меня совершенно эгоистическая причина для оптимизма. Я надеюсь, что в следующие 50 лет эта тема будет кормить мою компанию, так что я очень оптимистична. Спасибо.
[00:52:00 - 00:53:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you very much. Murat, I’ll finish with you. So, Robert first and then Murat, too, to close the panel.
[00:53:00 - 00:54:00] | Р. Уразов | Я, наверное, патриотически оптимистичен. У нас, у россиян, всегда получается плохо что-то делать сериями, но очень хорошо получается создавать уникальные изделия. И мне кажется, что для России это очень хороший вызов — проявить skill, который называется «смекалка». Она позволяет нам создавать определенные вещи, которые точно будут востребованы. Подскажу переводчикам: это называется Russian practice creativity. Спасибо.
[00:54:00 - 00:55:00] | B. Berthon | Mr. Sönmez, you have the final tweet of the panel.
[00:55:00 - 00:56:00] | M. Sönmez | Thank you, Bruno. I am very optimistic because I think this new platform will create new opportunities for innovation and jobs. Our son was applying for a university in the US a couple of years ago, and he had a friend who was not a very good student. I asked him, “What do you want to be?” And he said, “The job that I am going to take has not been invented yet”. I am an optimist. I believe in human creativity. Skills play a key role. We need to look at the education system, but we need to look at it in early childhood: years 1 through 3, where the brain is forming, with proper nutrition and teaching our kids to be creative, to collaborate, and to learn to learn. If we do that, I think humanity will be in good shape.
[00:56:00 - 00:57:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you very much, Mr. Sönmez. We are not finished. I am going to take some questions from the audience. But first, this is the most disciplined panel I have ever had a chance to lead, so a big round of applause for all of them! When the task was to have ten people speaking for three minutes in a row, I did not know how we would make it work, so fantastic. Thank you all. As I said, we are going to take questions from the audience, so just a reminder: a question is a short sentence with a question mark at the end, and, if possible, identify the person you would like the question to be answered by. Who wants to raise a hand for the first question? Из зала: Журнал «РЖД-Партнер». Сейчас много говорится о беспилотном вождении транспортных средств. В Австралии ходят беспилотные поезда. Они ходят в чистом поле, и тем не менее ежегодно умудряются сбивать определенное количество людей. Вы хотите сказать, что через десять лет на наших дорогах появятся автомобили, которые не будут убийцами?
[00:57:00 - 00:58:00] | B. Berthon | Valentin, do you want to take the question? And then we will go to Olga.
[00:58:00 - 00:59:00] | О. Ускова | Спасибо за вопрос. Да, через десять лет на наших дорогах появятся автомобили, которые будут в разы безопаснее человека. Любая статистика познается в сравнении. Движение на дороге является набором лимитированных алгоритмов. Есть правила движения, есть порядок принятия решений на дороге. Поэтому введение роботизированного транспорта увеличит безопасность движения в среднем на 62%. Это не цифры Cognitive Technologies — это общемировые совместные исследования, результаты работы Google и Mackenzie. Это связано с тем, что на процедуру управления автомобилем не влияют физиологические параметры: усталость, алкогольное опьянение, просто недостаточная интеллектуальность водителя, и так далее. Поэтому десять лет потребуется даже не столько разработчикам — системы искусственного интеллекта уже сейчас готовы к несению такой ответственности, — сколько юристам и социологам. Еще раз возвращаюсь к моральной стороне вопроса. К этим изменениям необходимо структурно подготовить все общество. Самый простой вопрос: случилась авария с участием робота — кто несет ответственность за ущерб? Производитель робота, производитель программного обеспечения, владелец? И таких вопросов очень много. В мире пока не существует разработанных алгоритмов. Сейчас идет активное движение по решению этих вопросов в виде международного диалога. На это потребуется минимум десять лет. Спасибо.
[00:59:00 - 01:00:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you very much Olga. Other questions from the audience?
[01:00:00 - 01:01:00] | B. Berthon | I have one for Mr. Brobst, because we started talking about cyber-security, which is a topic we had not looked into. As a data specialist, what is your view on how to manage all the risks related to data and what Mr. Gapanovich talked about around cyber-security?
[01:01:00 - 01:02:00] | S. Brobst | I think this is actually one of the biggest issues. There was a study done by the World Economic Forum that showed that this is actually the number one issue that needs to be addressed in order to increase the adoption of the Internet of Things. Take vehicles as an example: the ability to hack into a vehicle and take control of the vehicle can be done today. Definitely exposure can be done today. The devices in IoT today are like PCs were in the 1980s. In the early days of PCs, they were isolated things we did not have to think about protecting. Once we put them on the Internet, a whole set of new threats came on board. We are like the age of PCs with devices on the Internet of Things today. We need to advance much more quickly to the kinds of cyber- protection that we have on our own devices today, but it is always a cat-and- mouse game. There is always this sort of war of intellect, of creating new threats and preventing those threats. Encryption of the data is part of it, but protection of the control systems is also part of it, and protection just of the end points does not work anymore. Traditional security is protection of the end points, and, in IoT, there are too many end points. It does not work.
[01:02:00 - 01:03:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you. Mr. Borchert is going to respond as well, but let us take questions first. Из зала: Кристина Крецу, «Мегабайт Медиа». Сейчас растет популярность беспилотных автомобилей, автоматизации быта и работы. А чем будет заниматься человек, когда машина сможет делать за него все?
[01:03:00 - 01:04:00] | B. Berthon | Ms. Uskova, I think you and Mr. Urazov will have to prepare yourselves to respond to that question. But first, Mr. Borchert on cyber-security, and then, what is left for the human if robots are doing everything?
[01:04:00 - 01:05:00] | M. Borchert | I just wanted to build on what Mr. Brobst said about cyber-security. Indeed, we are facing a totally new set of challenges because, if you think about the billions of sensors that will be connected, it also means that the intelligence of the sensor will be very low if you have a sensor with a battery life of ten years or so. It will not be possible to protect the sensors as such. Those things need to move somewhere else, and that is the challenge where, as a tech industry, we need to find the solutions: to have protection mechanisms which are then in the network to take care of the end point security. As a matter of fact, encryption is not necessarily a security measure because, for example, if your phone is hacked and the connection and the data transfer are encrypted, no one can look, and the operator cannot look into the data and identify the security problem. Encryption as such is not a solution. That is why companies like us are also heavily investing in this kind of cyber-security. We have a big cyber-security centre in Berlin where we go through these kinds of threat scenarios and what to do against them. It is an important topic.
[01:05:00 - 01:06:00] | B. Berthon | On the consequences of automation, Ms. Uskova and Mr. Urazov, one after the other.
[01:06:00 - 01:07:00] | О. Ускова | Я просто хочу сказать, что мы все здесь оптимисты, но должны быть готовы к очень большим проблемам. Приведу небольшой пример. Мы сейчас плотно работаем с Китаем. Adidas перенесла свои китайские заводы на полностью роботизированные фабрики в Германии. Речь идет об освобождении от работы в течение шести лет более 1 200 000 человек в Китае. И когда мы ездили по этим китайским фабрикам, мы видели сетки, которые устанавливаются, потому что при сообщении об увольнении человек выбрасывается в окно. Это массовое явление, и существует бизнес по установке таких сеток на фабриках. Для стран, которые зарабатывали за счет дешевых услуг, нынешнее развитие сферы роботизации — социальная катастрофа. Требуется очень много международных усилий, чтобы снизить его негативный эффект. России в этом плане повезло. У нас огромная территория, мало народа и много ресурсов, и мы здесь видим экономический выход, для нас это — Национальная технологическая инициатива.
[01:07:00 - 01:08:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you. Robert?
[01:08:00 - 01:09:00] | Р. Уразов | Я, наверное, соглашусь с Ольгой. Есть классическая формула, что потребности человека безграничны, а ресурсы ограничены. Новая индустриальная революция лишь увеличивает наши ресурсы, высвобождая их для каких-то других потребностей. Чем будет заниматься бывший таксист или бывший водитель грузовика? Он будет работать на новых рынках, которые необходимо создавать. Перед Россией и другими странами стоит задача активно формировать эти новые рынки, а не ждать, когда они появятся самостоятельно. В противном случае мы получим сценарий, когда в мире будут миллионы, а может, и миллиарды безработных граждан, что действительно опасно.
[01:09:00 - 01:10:00] | B. Berthon | Thank you. Another question? I think I see a question over there. Из зала: Добрый день. Иван Данилин, Институт мировой экономики и международных отношений РАН. Прежде всего, огромное спасибо за очень интересную панельную сессию. Если позволите, небольшая провокация, как говорится, to whom it may concern. Вопрос в следующем. Нарратив, который утверждается в настоящее время (интернет вещей, индустриальная революция, интеллектуальные сети smart grids, и так далее), в основном акцентирует внимание на ликвидации различного рода неэффективности системы. Главным образом он говорит: вот тут мы оптимизируем, что-то будет двигаться быстрее, где-то мы потеряем меньше, и так далее. Но, как мы знаем, у оптимизации есть свой предел, после которого любые затраты перестают приносить сопоставимый результат. Было бы очень интересно услышать мнение присутствующих о том, что будет через 10—15—20 лет, после того, как завершится цикл оптимизации. На чем будут создаваться value и utility на стороне рынка? Поскольку в противном случае мы рискуем оказаться в так называемом парадоксе Солоу, когда прирост инвестиций в автоматизацию и компьютеризацию не будет приносить сопоставимых бенефитов для экономики. Спасибо.
[01:10:00 - 01:11:00] | B. Berthon | Markus?
[01:11:00 - 01:12:00] | M. Borchert | Thank you for the question. I honestly think this will go on and continue. I do not think this will be just a matter of ten years or so, because we will see a progression of technology. Just to take a simple example, processing power will continue to increase rapidly. In 2010, for USD 1,000, you could buy the processing capacity of the brain of a spider. Ten years later, in 2020, for USD 1,000, it is projected you will be able to buy the processing capacity of a human brain. The capacity and the ability will just continue to go up, and that will enable new use cases, further innovation, and further progress. That is why I am very confident that it will not just be a matter of ten years and then we drop off a cliff. It will continue to grow.
[01:12:00 - 01:13:00] | S. Brobst | What I observe among Teradata customers is that optimization is really just the first phase of IoT data exploitation. You are going to go for optimization because it is going to be the low-hanging fruit. You are going to be able to create a budget to justify your investment and so on, but the real value comes when you get to more sophisticated phases where you change to more of an outcomes-based business. Sure, I can use IoT to make more efficient manufacturing processes, but when I can create new products based on data and creating knowledge from data—when I can create better health care, not just optimizing the doctors’ time, but creating better outcomes from a health care and a safety point of view, that is when the breakthroughs happen. That is not the first phase of implementation. It is the second and third phases where you move to this outcomes-based result.
[01:13:00 - 01:14:00] | С. Протасов | С моей точки зрения, то, что сейчас происходит, можно назвать оптимизацией только в том смысле, что человечество на протяжении всей своей истории ухитряется производить больше ценности, value, за меньшее количество усилий. Но, скажем, в 1986 или 1987 году я читал статью в первом российском компьютерном журнале «Мир ПК», и там всерьез говорилось, что 33 мегагерца — это предел тактовой частоты для процессоров. И что будет дальше — непонятно, эта отрасль умерла. Мы все знаем, что это оказалось совсем не так. И называть оптимизацией то, что сейчас происходит, мне кажется, не совсем корректно. Можно вспомнить квантовые вычисления, которые сейчас развиваются невероятным образом. Можно вспомнить blockchain, который потенциально может изменить все, включая нашу социальную жизнь, не говоря об отдельных индустриях типа финансовых и других. Спасибо.
[01:14:00 - 01:15:00] | B. Berthon | This panel is being somewhat optimistic on the power of technology. Let me close with a short anecdote from Davos in February, when we had a dinner with seven Nobel Prize winners in Economics. One would have been enough, but we had seven. You can imagine that none of them would agree on anything. The topic was the impact of technology on productivity and jobs. You basically had three camps: one camp saying, “I don’t know,” which is normally the only honest economist in the room; one camp saying that we are going to create so many new jobs that this is going to change the world in terms of productivity and opportunities; and another one saying we are going to eliminate so many jobs that in the end, it will be a marginal productivity world and jobs will not be the heart of how we make money. But they agreed on one thing, which is that the way we define productivity is completely inappropriate. That is back to your questions about efficiency. When we look at how we live, for those who do not remember, we did not have an iPhone in 2005, and we did not have social media less than ten years ago. What we define in terms of quality of life, efficiency of productivity, and how we use knowledge has nothing in common with what the statistics and economists actually say. That is one of the problems: what we call efficiency is what we measure, but actually the way we change how we operate and how we live is exponentially faster than what the statistics are saying. I am going to finish on that very positive note, and again, please, a big thank you to the panel that has been so interesting as well as disciplined.
