[00:00:00 - 00:01:00] | М. Гусман | Добрый день, уважаемые коллеги! Мы начинаем нашу сегодняшнюю дискуссию. Как вы знаете, она посвящена теме, которую мы сформулировали так: «Новейшие технологии vs традиционная журналистика. Несет ли искусственный интеллект угрозу профессии журналиста?» Название очень пафосное, с большими опасениями за судьбу нашей профессии. Правда, вчера я уже имел честь быть модератором дискуссии по инновациям в здравоохранении — здесь же, в зале конгрессов, — и там я наслышался такого о том, что современная медицина уже делает и собирается делать с человеком, что все наши журналистские потуги кажутся достаточно скромными. Лично я хочу верить, что не доживу до того дня, когда искусственный интеллект заменит нас с вами. Хотя здесь могут быть и другие мнения. Поскольку здесь присутствуют люди, которые занимаются этим профессионально, вы услышите их мнение. Я приветствую в этом зале не только уважаемых коллег по панельной дискуссии, которых я вам сейчас представлю, но и участников конгресса, представляющих руководителей целого ряда крупнейших мировых информационных агентств. Мы благодарны им за участие в нашей встрече. Прежде всего, я хотел бы предоставить слово моему сомодератору Клайву Маршалу. Он возглавляет одно из ведущих мировых информационных агентств — Press Association, самое известное агентство Великобритании, кроме того, он является президентом Всемирного совета информационных агентств. В сегодняшней дискуссии принимают участие (я буду представлять слева направо): Хироки Сугита, главный редактор известнейшего японского агентства Kyodo News; Малькольм Кёрк, президент ведущего канадского информационного агентства Canadian Press. С удовольствием представляю своего друга Джона Данишевски, вице-президента Associated Press. Далее сидят: Сергей Михайлов, генеральный директор Информационного агентства России «ТАСС»; господин Лю Сыян, вице-президент агентства Xinhua; Джузеппе Чербоне, генеральный директор итальянского агентства ANSA. Меня зовут Михаил Гусман, я работаю первым заместителем генерального директора в Информационном агентстве России «ТАСС». Позвольте предоставить слово моему сомодератору Клайву Маршалу. Он скажет короткое вступительное слово, а затем будут выступать спикеры. Clive, you are welcome.
[00:01:00 - 00:02:00] | C. Marshall | Thank you very much, Mikhail. So is artificial intelligence an opportunity or a threat for the journalism that is at the heart of our business? There has been a huge amount of development over the last few years and the first speaker that I am going to introduce today is John Daniszewski representing the Associated Press. The Associated Press has been at the forefront of capitalizing on this type of technology, and I read an article recently in Wired magazine that suggested that in the coming period, virtually all of the earnings reports that the Associated Press will be providing to their subscribers will be generated via artificial intelligence, through a relationship they have with a company called Automated Insights. So I would like to now hand you over to John Daniszewski from the Associated Press.
[00:02:00 - 00:03:00] | J. Daniszewski | Good morning and thank you, Clive and Mikhail. I am happy to see all of you and appreciate the opportunity to talk on this topic. The title of the panel is “Newest Technologies vs. Traditional Journalism”, but what I would like to suggest is that the newest technologies are not versus or against traditional journalism, but they are in service of traditional journalism and the traditional journalist. In effect, the new technology extends and expands the capabilities of news organizations, allowing so much more to be accomplished. Technology today, we all know, is a tremendous opportunity. At the AP we are riding the technology wave to enable us to do our finest work more efficiently and with more distinction. As many of you know, the AP is a 170-year-old, not-for-profit news cooperative. One reason we have existed for so long is that we have continually innovated, from clipper ships and pony express to the telegraph, to leased phone circuits, to satellites, to the web; and in format from print only to photos, to radio, to television, to online video, and now to virtual reality. Whatever medium comes along, wherever our customers are going, that is where we want to be. That is why we do not look with anxiety at the coming of new technology. It is our friend. If you look at the trends in the news business, there are two major ones. The first and most important is the shift to mobile, and an ancillary to that is the shift to social. So what we are looking for are news presentations that are both mobile and social friendly. This means distinctive stories, visually-led stories in tight and engaging presentations that are easily shared on social media. And we have found that automating some routine stories has been a wonderful way to free up staff resources, while still providing increased values to our customer. Two years ago, in a very big step, AP produced its first computer-generated automated news stories. As Clive mentioned, we did it with company quarterly earnings reports and we did it in partnership with a company called Automated Insights and with Zacks Investment Research. Before this step we were producing about 300 earnings reports every quarter, tying up a lot of our staff time for what was rote work. But now, by using algorithms and computer programs, the AP publishes some 3,700 company earnings reports, a twelve-fold increase in volume. Each story is about 300 words in length and is based on data and other information released by the companies. So our customers are getting more content faster. The big benefit, though, is that the journalists have more time for more important stories. They still do the most important company reports by hand, providing their intelligence and their insight to bring to that the work what only a human can do, but by not having to do all these company reports, we have freed up our reporters to do more enterprise, more distinctive stories, stories that might be a little bit off the beaten track. We are very happy with the success of this; it has been a win-win all around, so now we are thinking about moving it into the arena of sports. For years, we have provided daily news stories on baseball games, and that is a very important sport in the United States and parts of Latin America. But we never had the resources to cover a whole other level of the sport, which is Minor League Baseball. But because of automation, in the coming weeks we expect to be able to begin generating Minor League Baseball stories, and we think we will have about 5,000 of these stories. Again, this is being done in partnership with Automated Insights. As we move along, there will be other opportunities. It all depends on our ability to obtain accurate and reliable data and to be able to extract it automatically. I can just give you one other example of something we are doing now. All of our news stories have what we call a summary paragraph and we have been able, through automation, to extract that summary paragraph, and convert it into broadcast stories for our customers. So it is just another example of how we can use computers. So I think I will leave it there for now, with this one thought that automation is really going to be part of a pillar of our strategic view going forward, to get deeper insights from our metadata and find ways to use it more efficiently, to do better stories in greater volume and more cheaply, so that our journalists can do very strong work on their own.
[00:03:00 - 00:04:00] | M. Gusman | Thank you, John. Спасибо господину Данишевски за интересную информацию и рассказ. Я надеюсь, что его продолжит Малькольм Кёрк, который представляет Canadian Press. Они сейчас сидят рядом, и у них есть общие точки зрения.
[00:04:00 - 00:05:00] | M. Kirk | Thank you, Mikhail. It is a great privilege to be here with you all today and I very much welcome the opportunity to talk about a very intriguing subject, which is occurring at a very critical time in our industry, particularly given the level of disruption that is taking place. I feel, John, if I could pass over my speech to you, we would see some of the very, very same themes, so you may hear a few similar messages coming through, but it is indicative I think, in some ways, of the strength of the partnership that the Canadian Press has with the Associated Press. We have always worked very, very closely together, and the AP has obviously, as John has said, been a great innovator in this space and we have learned a great deal from them in the process. I would just like to say that the theme of the session is newest technologies versus traditional journalism, and I just want to focus on that word “versus” again, because I think for us, it sounds like we are having to choose one or the other, and it suggests, perhaps, that they are opposite and competing values. I think at CP, we don’t really quite view the two worlds as opposing forces or binary choices that we have to make to be successful in the future, and if we look at recent trends, what is really being done in the field today as well as where we are headed, the future is a blend of new technology and quality journalism. So it is full of possibilities that are both intriguing and exciting. We see three main justifications, you might say benefits is a better word, for bringing automation into the news room. Yes, there are savings to be had, we all have tight budgets these days, there are smarter ways for us all to work, and as the news organizations struggle to figure out better ways to get more compelling journalism out of our staff, there are smarter ways in which to operate and automation brings such an opportunity. Automation allows us to customize the final story, to tailor it for specific audiences. It can be localized to a region, personalized based on a variety of criteria. But I think most importantly, and to echo John’s point, it frees journalists up to do what they really got into this business for in the first place, and that is real journalism, rather than the kind of rote transcription that has unfortunately become a bit of a necessary evil in most of our news rooms these days—important, but less compelling to a lot of the people who work for us. I will just dwell on a couple of points. One of the prime movers in the world of automated journalism leans towards this position. Kristian Hammond, he is the Chief Scientist at Narrative Science, one of the world’s leading automated journalism firms, and he has predicted that in the future, 90% of all stories will be written by machines. I do not know how I feel about that, except that the volume of stories is maybe going up exponentially, so perhaps the percentage might still hold true. He did not define when in the future, but the truth of such a bold statement seems remote and maybe even a bit fanciful. But as a technology journalist, Olivia Solon, said a couple of years ago, if you want any nuance, humour, puns, satire, emotion or sarcasm in your articles, basically any kind of creative flair, humans will trump machines, at least for now. So while machines can’t ask probing questions and perhaps can’t sense an evasive answer, they can’t perhaps do analysis or context and they can’t generate emotion or move people to act, but what they can do is take the drudgery out of some of the necessary news tasks and free up journalists to do journalism. We have taken a very active interest in AP’s relationship with Automated Insights. We distribute a lot of AP’s content in Canada. The Canadian earnings reports that the AP has pioneered with American firms is now being applied to companies in Canada and we also are working with AI to figure out other ways that we might actually be able to open up new markets for content that is particularly useful in digital format. You talked about baseball. In Canada hockey is a very important subject to us. We love it! We used to say, “All the hockey you can give Canadians, just keep giving them all the hockey they can take until they are finished and then give them more”. But one of the areas that we don’t actually have enough content on for hockey is actually in the minor leagues and in the semi-professional leagues, and that data is actually hard for us; we don’t have the staff to be able to turn around stories for things like this, yet there is a demand for it in the market. So we are looking at the automated possibilities to be able to create stories and actually be able to serve clients now in a way that we have never been able to do before. So it really does unearth a tremendous number of possibilities. As far back as 2012, CP used automation to tell localized stories based on data drawn from our national census, the national census which basically goes out to every Canadian household and they have to fill in this information that tells us about how many people live there, how much time it takes them to get to work, this kind of thing. But using a common database and working with our journalists to come up with clear and concise story templates, we were able to plug the local data into the stories about economic, social, and demographic trends and tell stories specific to most of Canada’s big cities. And this was a money generator, so we were able to turn the data into an investigative and enterprising project that we were able sell to all of our clients across the country, because it was both national and local in scope. It is a great example of how to turn data into a revenue generating opportunity. So to John’s point, I think we can imagine the stories waiting to be told around real estate trends, sports scores, the data that comes from those events, sales figures, monthly or annual trends, games scores, box scores. It is really easy, I think, to be able to create programming that tailors the story to highly localized readers, viewers, or users. Just to close, I think in resource-strapped news rooms around the world, the opportunity to employ machines that will liberate our most precious resource, our editorial crews, to create compelling, insightful, and important journalism is in front of us. It is not just irresistible, it is essential to our collective future. Thank you.
[00:05:00 - 00:06:00] | C. Marshall | Thank you very much, Malcolm, and it is good to hear that you believe this new technology is complementary rather than that it is going to completely replace the journalists that are so important to our businesses. I hope you are right about sentiment and nuance and emotion, but I guess already, in many other parts of our business, sentiment analysis is already being provided by technology, so I wonder whether we are at the very beginning of artificial intelligence and that perhaps sentiment will come next. I would now like to hand over to Mr. Sugita, who is the managing senior writer at Kyodo News, to get a perspective from Japan, which is often seen as one of the centres of new technology. Mr. Sugita.
[00:06:00 - 00:07:00] | H. Sugita | Thank you very much for organizing this very wonderful panel to discuss this very important topic in the journalism industry. Kyodo is trying to catch up and utilize all of the AI and robots, too, to improve our reporting, but today I would like to focus on the journalistic principles in the era of AI or robots. As Clive said, Japan is one of the most advanced countries of artificial intelligence and robot industries. At the Ise-Shima G7 Summit meeting that was held this past May, the world leaders looked so amused and fascinated when they were watching the robots performing and serving tea during the intermissions, but at the same time, because of the advanced technologies and the advent of robots, they are concerned that many people in their countries will lose jobs and cry for assistance from the government. The most visible industry in which robots are making considerable change in Japan is the automobile-manufacturing sector. GPS, inter-vehicle gap keeping, obstacle avoidance, and pedestrian protection systems are all now loaded in new Toyota cars. Nissan, another giant Japanese car company, developed an AI system memorizing human drivers’ driving habits. These major Japanese automobile companies are aiming at introducing full self- driving cars by the year 2020, so in four years we will see fully automatic cars driving on Japan’s streets. Given the rapid progress in automobile technology, there are increasing arguments about enacting a set of traffic laws to allow driverless cars to move along the streets. That is a bright side of AI or robots, but there is a downside, a dark side of the use of AI and robots. A prominent Japanese think tank published a shocking report earlier this year which said that 49%, almost half of the jobs in Japan, will be taken over by robots or AI within 20 years. The report predicts that robots will replace such jobs as reception clerks, bank tellers, security guards, assembly workers, supermarket clerks, table workers, trained operators, and many unskilled jobs. The report also named the jobs that will survive in the era of AI, which are doctors and healthcare staff, artists, musicians, actors, critics, lawyers, teachers, and journalists. That is the good news. We can see some common characteristics in the jobs that robots or AI cannot take over. I think that there are three common characteristics. First, those jobs are not pre-programmed. Second, the jobs need creativeness. And third, the jobs need high communication skills. Let me explain those three characteristics in the context of journalism. Creativeness needs ideas and artistic sense, which attracts audiences and readers. You need high communication skills to understand the complex world and explain to others about it. AI and robots can steal thousands of pre-programmed jobs, but the real world we live in and journalists work in is more complicated, and human beings need to be able to react and adjust ourselves to unforeseen, non-pre-programmed situations. We need to be able to think out good stories ourselves, using the database or AI. In journalism, of course, some jobs will disappear, such as the reporting of routine governmental announcements, mundane statistics, small city news, and so on, and some will remain as valuable jobs, which only human reporters can perform. These are investigative reporting, exposing hidden problems, deep analysis, profile stories with rich human emotions, and reporting about new fashion and social trends. Nowadays it is said that AI can conquer human intelligence. In fact, AI has won over humans in such games as chess, Japanese Shogi and Chinese Go. However, AI can only play such games after it gets instructions from us human beings. It is we, humans, who can give them the instructions. I think it is the case in journalism as well. It is journalists with strong motivations who can make AI work well. We tend to think that we are in competition with robots or AI and we are losing to them. I think that is the wrong way to understand what is happening now. We need to strengthen our motivations and passions to provide our readers with more valuable stories and information by utilizing advanced technology in searching and analyzing for writing. Even in the era of AI, the core point of journalism is the same: That is, we have to heighten and strengthen our journalistic sense. I think we should keep that in mind. Thank you very much.
[00:07:00 - 00:08:00] | C. Marshall | Thank you very much, Mr. Sugita. It just struck me as you were going through the list of unskilled jobs that would perhaps be lost through artificial intelligence that perhaps one of the consequences of this technology will be greater pressure on the education system to create new skills for these unskilled workers who will otherwise find that employment is very difficult. I would now like to hand over to Sergey Mikhaylov, who is the General Director of TASS, to get a Russian perspective on this technology.
[00:08:00 - 00:09:00] | С. Михайлов | Спасибо, Клайв! Добрый день, дорогие друзья! То, что я услышал от предыдущих ораторов о схватке, представляющей тему нашей панели: несет ли искусственный интеллект опасность, не оставят ли роботы журналистов без работы, — я услышал с радостью. И мои коллеги, и я не готовы сдаться без боя. Сразу мы не сдадимся. Хотя, конечно, все темы, связанные с искусственным интеллектом, очень волнительны и очень пристально изучаются, в том числе и в России. В прошлом году в New York Times опубликовали тест, где читателям предложили угадать, какой текст написал человек, а какой — робот. По мере прохождения теста у всех, кому я его показывал, росло понимание того, что человек давно и безвозвратно утратил монополию на производство информационных сообщений. Современные роботы вполне удачно производят рифмованные тексты. Автоматические скрипты используются уже десятками новостных организаций во всем мире: мои коллеги много говорили об этом. Совсем недавно новости о внедрении искусственного интеллекта в нашу профессию приходили в основном из США, однако в прошлом году мы получили великолепный пример из Китая, где был опубликован первый бизнес-отчет, полностью написанный роботом-программой. Статья состоит из почти тысячи слов, и написана она настолько неплохо и всего за одну минуту, что это вызвало большой ажиотаж и большие споры — в Китае и не только — относительно того, не умерла ли профессия. Китайские журналисты очень по-разному это оценивали, многие действительно испугались: это было видно из текстов, из записей. Это очень интересно. Я руководитель информационного агентства, и робот-журналист избавит нас от множества проблем, с которыми мы сталкиваемся каждый день. Специфика нашего бизнеса такова, что в восемь, девять, десять часов, в зависимости от смены, все основные средства встают и уходят домой. Роботы не болеют или болеют редко, они не срывают сроки, не повторяют ошибки, сами себя корректируют и учатся раз и навсегда, поправляют свой алгоритм сами. Это очень удобно. По части технологий российские новостные медиа стараются не уступать своим коллегам с Востока и Запада. У нас роботы комментируют спортивные матчи, пишут отчеты о котировках акций, информируют пользователей о пробках в крупных городах, формируют ленту событий на недели вперед, редактируют стандартные тексты. В «ТАСС» сегодня мы тоже используем алгоритмы для подготовки части новостей, используем роботов для анализа востребованности наших продуктов в режиме реального времени в секторах В2В и В2С, для анализа потребительских предпочтений по контенту, по продаже таргетированной рекламы на сайте, для анализа производительности труда наших сотрудников: кто, что и сколько пишет за единицу времени, и сколько это стоит нам и нашим клиентам. Мы думаем, как еще можно оптимизировать рабочее время наших коллег за счет использования новых технологий: ведь машинам теперь можно поручить всю техническую, рутинную, стандартную работу, освободив таким образом время журналистов для действительно глубоких, эксклюзивных, важных вещей. Другой вопрос — насколько умными могут стать роботы, и как скоро это произойдет, и как это отразится на востребованности профессиональных навыков человека. Крис Хаммонд, соучредитель американской компании Narrative Science, которая с 2012 года предлагает стандартные продукты своим клиентам в зоне финансовых и спортивных новостей, предсказал, что к 2027 году более 90% всех новостей в США будут писаться компьютерными программами. Я не знаю, согласны ли с этим мои коллеги из Associated Press, но интересен ответ на второй вопрос: когда же робот получит Пулитцеровскую премию? На что Крис (по образованию программист и журналист, причем профессор), подумав, сказал, что через пять лет Пулитцеровскую премию обязательно получит робот. Для этого понадобится всего пять лет. На мой взгляд, здесь начинается самое интересное. Эксперты разделяются во мнениях, как далеко может зайти использование искусственного интеллекта в журналистике. Одни утверждают, что пройдут десятилетия, прежде чем роботы-журналисты смогут расширить сегодняшние возможности и проводить расследования, писать глубокие осмысленные тексты; другие говорят, что это произойдет буквально через один, два, три года. Все действительно меняется очень быстро, буквально каждый день. Еще вчера мы не могли представить себе, как будет передаваться информация сейчас. Еще не забыт факс, а мы уже передаем гигабайты информации в течение долей секунды на другой конец земного шара. Я не берусь оспаривать ни одну из этих точек зрения, но склонен думать, что технологии будут развиваться только при наличии красивых, увлекающих и труднодостижимых целей, а формулировка этих целей находится в руках и умах человека: это право и способность, и наш гений мы никому не отдадим. Применительно к нашей профессии это означает: тем, кто хочет оставаться в ней в ближайшем будущем, нужно будет искать сферы, куда искусственный интеллект внедрится не скоро и где главным будет все-таки человек. В первую очередь такой сферой является сам человек, его интересы, отношения между людьми, а значит изучение людей, выявление закономерностей их поведения, обнаружение тенденций в изменениях в обществе. Мне кажется, что все это останется прерогативой журналистики людей, а не роботов. Еще одна важная составляющая работы современных новостных медиа — это освоение техники и технологии интерактивного взаимодействия с аудиторией. Думаю, что будущее за этим, и с этим робот тоже вряд ли справится в ближайшее время. По крайней мере, я так считаю. Хотя, может быть, где-то уже родился человек, который своим гениальным открытием порвет эту точку зрения в клочья. Тезис об интерактивном взаимодействии с аудиторией и успешности именно в этом направлении нашего бизнеса подтверждается историями успеха таких медиакомпаний, как всем известная Huffington Post, в основе которой лежит не столько поиск эксклюзивного контента или уникальных технических решений, сколько внимание к аудитории, изучение вопроса о том, чего хочет читатель, куда и как он ходит, что его увлекает и волнует. Обороты подобных проектов, исчисляемые сотнями миллионов, — серьезный аргумент для инвестиций в развитие коммуникационных навыков сегодняшних профессионалов медиа. В пользу развития человеческих навыков, которые пока не способен освоить робот, говорят многочисленные доклады о будущем нашей профессии. Так, среди человеческих навыков, наиболее востребованных в течение ближайших пяти лет, называют критическое мышление, креативность, эмоциональный интеллект и гибкость ума. Такой робот еще не придуман. В числе навыков, которые будут востребованы, особо отмечается умение общаться и договариваться с людьми, управлять ими, понимать их и служить им. Часть актуальных сфер деятельности напрямую связаны со способностями человеческого мозга, умением быстро думать, видеть суть, находить решение комплексных многоуровневых проблем, генерировать новые проекты и идеи. Все это говорит о том, что грандиозные технологические перемены, на пороге которых мы стоим, стремительное внедрение в нашу жизнь искусственного интеллекта не столько представляет угрозу для человека, сколько требует от него еще большего развития интеллектуальных и эмоциональных навыков для решения гораздо более сложных, чем раньше, когнитивных задач. Уверен, что к этой теме мы не раз вернемся в ближайшее время — и на форумах, и на других встречах. Предсказывать будущее — дело неблагодарное, но все-таки тот, кто сумеет угадать тенденцию и найти гармонию в том, чтобы переложить на робота всю рутину, а себе оставить правильное формулирование задач для робота, — тот, мне кажется, будет в ближайшее время самым успешным в профессии. Информация только дорожает, в отличие от нефти. Мы находимся в очень правильном сегменте, и я удивлен, что зал, где обсуждается нефть, заполнен больше, чем тот, где обсуждается информация, которая действительно стоит дороже. Спасибо, коллеги!
[00:09:00 - 00:10:00] | М. Гусман | Спасибо, Сергей Владимирович! Наша дискуссия только набирает обороты, и я подумал, что искусственный интеллект, компьютеры, давно обыграли человека в шашки, потом одержали победу над нашими великими шахматными чемпионами: над Каспаровым, Карповым, Крамником. Недавно компьютеры победили в игре го — великой игре. Все, кто наблюдал за этими сражениями, пишут: компьютеры победили, но не создали ни одной красивой комбинации, не показали ни одной красивой партии. В истории шахмат их победы останутся, но творческих побед не будет. Смею предположить, что в соревновании наших коллег с роботами, компьютерами, искусственным интеллектом, — последние, возможно, научатся составлять замечательные бизнес-отчеты и даже складывать какую-то информационную модель, писать сообщения. Тем не менее великие журналистские перья останутся великими журналистскими перьями, и в этой связи я готов усомниться в правоте прогноза о том, что робот получит Пулицеровскую премию, — по той простой причине, что творчество всегда будет выше искусственного разума. Хотя чем черт не шутит: в жюри тоже сидят люди, и если конкурс будет закрытый, они могут и ошибиться. Что же касается сделанного в Китае достижения, о котором сказал Сергей, — я хочу попросить выступить нашего дорогого друга Лю Сыяна, вице- президента китайского агентства Xinhua, который расскажет, что делается в Китае на этом пути. Прошу Вас!
[00:10:00 - 00:11:00] | С. Лю | Спасибо! Добрый день! Сейчас мы все можем очень четко почувствовать, что технологии неразрывно связаны с жизнью, они дают нам надежду. Интернет и облачные технологии вносят значительные изменения во взаимоотношения человека и информации. Конечно, мы как представители СМИ не можем оставаться в стороне. В этом году агентству Xinhua исполняется 60 лет, и мы разработали особый интеллект, который называется «Быстрое перо». Он может делать доклады об изменении валютных курсов, накануне открытия Олимпийских игр эта программа может делать доклады о спортивных событиях и так далее. Программа «Быстрое перо» — это только первый шаг навстречу новым технологиям. В будущем, в течение 30 лет, общество сможет стать абсолютно механизированным, и я уверен: темпы технического прогресса превысят наши ожидания. Например, Google также имеет передовые разработки в этой сфере. Каким образом искусственный интеллект будет влиять на СМИ? Только что несколько моих коллег рассказали о своих точках зрения. Я уверен, что искусственный интеллект прежде всего повысит продуктивность и объемы продаж. Технология может стать факелом, который зажжет все интернет- пространство, сможет работать с большими объемами данных. Сейчас программы могут переводить, обрабатывать видео, программы продвигают наше развитие. Я уверен, что в будущем именно искусственный интеллект будет определять наше развитие. Разумеется, технологии изменят и традиционную сферу деятельности журналистов, и экономическую модель журналистики. В чем сейчас проявляется искусственный интеллект? Прежде всего, это инновации. Инновация — это девиз нашей эпохи, это вечный поиск, необходимый выбор человечества. Сейчас в Китае проходит соревнование по инновациям — можно сказать, соревнование в рамках всей страны. Xinhua тоже участвует в этом общенародном соревновании. Мы, агентство Xinhua, вводим инновации и в модель управления. Мы впервые привлекли к работе в нашей компании специалистов по искусственному интеллекту, по созданию виртуальной реальности и в других областях. В нашем агентстве эти области являются приоритетными в развитии технологий. Очевидно, что искусственный интеллект — это область, в которой все СМИ могут хорошо себя проявить. Однако он никогда не заменит поэтов или журналистов. Холодность и объективность никогда не заменят стремления к справедливости. Новая техническая революция, несущая с собой новые способы и методы интервью, а также новые способности корреспондентов к аналитике и предсказаниям, предъявляет гораздо более высокие требования. Уже нельзя ограничиваться процентами, пропорциями и цифрами, — сейчас нужно демонстрировать свою истинную ценность именно как журналиста. Победа искусственного интеллекта — это, безусловно, хороший признак, но я уверен, что искусственный интеллект приносит гораздо больше новых возможностей, нежели вызовов в отношении традиционных СМИ. Спасибо!
[00:11:00 - 00:12:00] | М. Гусман | Мы с Клайвом не случайно попросили нашего друга Джузеппе Чербоне, генерального директора итальянского агентства ANSA, выступить последним. Сегодня из всех сидящих на этой сцене, а может, и во всем зале, он единственный, кто профессионально занимается вопросами искусственного интеллекта, чьи научные устремления связаны именно с ним. Господин Чербоне даже имеет ученую степень в этой области, так что в журналистском мире есть руководитель информационного агентства, который, с одной стороны, руководит коллективом журналистов, а с другой стороны, сам участвует в создании искусственного интеллекта, который должен в итоге смести журналистов с поля. Не знаю, правда это или нет, Джузеппе, но сейчас Вы нам об этом расскажете. Пожалуйста!
[00:12:00 - 00:13:00] | G. Cerbone | Thank you, Mikhail, for your kind introduction. I am really pleased to be here this year for two reasons. One is the topic, which has interested me scientifically since my younger age, and the second one is because my country is the guest of honour this year at SPIEF, so there is this double side. Getting back to today’s topic, let me start you with a kind of joke. When I started occupying myself in artificial intelligence, the question was why? Do you lack a natural one? The answer, of course, is not the same for everybody, you understand; somebody may say yes or no, but the point is that I think we have to set exactly the words right. Since 1956, based upon the studies of Alan Turing starting a little bit before the Second World War, when he cracked the German Enigma encrypting machine— in 1956 McCarthy invented this name “artificial intelligence”. I think we should be involved in the two sides, artificial and intelligence. First of all, artificial is perfect. We are doing things artificially. There is a more complicated world, so computers can win at chess, can win at Go, and that is computational power. Since the sixties, when a guy by the name of Hubbard invented the concept that intelligence is computational power, we always strive to get more power, and nowadays we can, because there is distributed intelligence, as it is called. And in fact these computers, most of them – the first one did not, the Deep Blue did not – most computers use distributed intelligence. So whenever they have to do something, they spread it around the network, the computation, and they get the result and the answer and they make the right move. So now the point is, what is intelligence? So computers can win at chess, can win at Go, can build machines, can build themselves. What is intelligence? One of the definitions is the ability to adapt. That is what my old Professor Tom Dietrich used to say. What is intelligence? The ability to adapt. It is very easy, very straightforward. Can computers really adapt? I hope not, otherwise we will all be dead. So the question is, can computers win the Pulitzer Prize? Well, let me put it in another way. Would Mikhail Gusman be happy with a computer doing his interviews? Can a computer conduct interviews with the tone, with the strength, with the position, with the ability that Misha does? I think there is a long, long, long way to go. What are our expectations? I think we set our expectations too high. If our expectations are that computers automate things, so the keyword is automation, yes, absolutely, a computer can automate really well, it can do it a lot better than we can and a lot faster, because of computational power, for technical reasons (I will not go into technical details, of course). So can computers automate? Absolutely. AP is doing the right things, choosing a sector, working on that. That is automation. That is not intelligence, sorry to say, because you lack induction, you know the next step and then what do you do? So these things are not easy, there are great professionals, they are very complex, but it is automation. Automation has been done for many years. For example, Google used this stuff. The points where I think the next steps are, at ANSA we do the same. We watch the web, with spiders of course, not in the human sense. We extract information, we send it to our customers, we use semantic databases, they have been around for many years, but nobody knows about that. That is intelligence as well, but that is categorization again, it is automation. Sometimes they make mistakes like humans too – not us, of course! So the point is, what can computers do? What is the real challenge? The real challenge is the big data, the terabytes of terabytes, which, without going again into technical details, but it is a lot of data, more than that we can think of or we can handle. Analyzing the terabytes of data, of pictures, of video, of whatever is out there. I think that computers, not soon, but we will be able to discover nice stories there, because analyzing the data, analyzing what people post on socials, on the web, they will be able to find out a nice story, they will be able to find out hidden facts; but who is going to certify those things? Who is going to verify that those things are correct? Are we happy saying that, okay, 90% of the people out there are saying it is right, so it is right, and we take a little chance? And if we do so and we are wrong, who are we going to sue to get restitution from eventual damage that these stories can cause? So the point is, can machines automate? Yes. Will they have intelligence? Probably. Certainly there is still a lot of work to do on that. I think for now, good journalists like Misha should feel pretty safe.
[00:13:00 - 00:14:00] | C. Marshall | Thank you very much, Giuseppe. All of our panellists have now made their contribution and I think it was great to have the final contribution from somebody who has a PhD in artificial intelligence. Perhaps before I try and sum up the session, we should take some questions from the audience. Does anybody have any questions for the panellists?
[00:14:00 - 00:15:00] | М. Гусман | У нас в гостях находится Виктор Шкулев, президент компании Hearst Shkulev Media. Передайте микрофон Виктору Шкулеву, который хотел сказать кое-что по этой теме. Пожалуйста, Виктор!
[00:15:00 - 00:16:00] | В. Шкулев | Большое спасибо! Я очень рад, как развивается наша дискуссия. Мне кажется, я очень близок к тем точкам зрения, которые здесь прозвучали. Самое важное заключается в том, что искусственный интеллект, все компьютерные технологии, созданы человеком и поставлены на службу человеку, то есть журналистике, которую мы сегодня обсуждаем. По большому счету, здесь нет конфликта, а есть определенная ситуация. Если мы говорим «искусственный интеллект против журналистики», прежде всего можно смело утверждать, что искусственный интеллект, автоматизация и роботизация работают против плохой журналистики. В этом плане мы, занимаясь медиабизнесом, имеем прекрасную возможность использовать компьютерные технологии, для того чтобы постепенно вытеснить некачественную журналистику и развивать те направления, где нужна качественная журналистика. Другое очень важное обстоятельство заключается в том, что, если человек управляет автоматизацией и искусственным интеллектом, мы всегда будем стараться сделать, чтобы с помощью технологий дополнить области, где нам приходится очень трудно. Сегодня их уже называли: это обработка огромных баз данных, выполнение рутинной механической работы. Однако управляя технологиями и развивая искусственный интеллект, мы будем все плотнее дополнять то, что может делать человек. Искусственные технологии будут постоянно конкурировать с нами, в том числе и там, где сегодня конкуренция кажется невероятной: в области эмоций, экспертизы, коммуникаций. Тем не менее Вы абсолютно правы, когда говорите про шахматные победы робота и компьютера. Он просчитывает комбинации, а человек неспособен просчитать такое количество комбинаций. Однако робот неспособен изобрести новые комбинации. Поэтому человек будет по- прежнему изобретать искусственный интеллект и ставить его на службу себе. Мне кажется, это очень важно. Спасибо!
[00:16:00 - 00:17:00] | М. Гусман | Спасибо, Виктор! Мы специально оставили некоторое время для возможных вопросов из зала. Пожалуйста! Если Вас не затруднит, представьтесь, пожалуйста. Если у Вас есть вопрос, кому он адресован?
[00:17:00 - 00:18:00] | В. Залужский | Большое спасибо за очень интересную дискуссию. Владимир Залужский, ПАО «Северсталь». Было очень любопытно послушать дискуссию. Вопрос адресован всем. Вы говорили про технологии изменения, создания контента. Однако мы видим, что меняются и технологии потребительских предпочтений, аудитория уже по-другому потребляет информацию. Мы видим больше видео, тексты становятся более короткими, распространяются social media. Может быть, это тоже определенный вызов для журналистики? Может, в будущем не будет больших аналитических публикаций, к сожалению, но теме не менее? Не разучится ли таким образом человечество читать, анализировать информацию? Очень интересно ваше мнение. Спасибо!
[00:18:00 - 00:19:00] | М. Гусман | Кто хочет ответить? Джон!
[00:19:00 - 00:20:00] | J. Daniszewski | I think the point is that technology gives us better tools to reach our readers and to know what they want. We are using technology now to see which of our stories are trending and where they are going and how they are being used. So technology is not simply about automating the production of stories; it is also about understanding what our audience wants and serving it better, and I could imagine a day when we take this metadata and will be able to target stories to individual customers and really package a news report that is individualized to an organization. So to echo the point that I made and others made, it really is a way to extend and expand our possibilities, so it should not be something that diminishes the news product, but makes it better.
[00:20:00 - 00:21:00] | М. Гусман | Есть ли еще вопросы?
[00:21:00 - 00:22:00] | Д. Коротков | Большое спасибо! Коротков Дмитрий, Информационное агентство России «ТАСС». Коллеги, вы много говорили про тексты: как вы работаете с текстами, как вы создаете роботов. Вы назвали это автоматизацией, однако вы также сказали, что это еще и большое количество видео, аудио для радиостанций, фото. Я знаю, что все ваши агентства выпускают не только текстовую информацию. Хотелось бы немного услышать о технологиях, которые работают в этой части журналистики. Кроме тех технологий, которые уже есть у всех в смартфонах, что существует нового, что может появиться? Второй короткий вопрос: может быть, вы немного пофантазируете, и кто- нибудь скажет, когда наконец откроется первое информационное агентство, в штате которого не будет журналистов, а будут только IT-специалисты?
[00:22:00 - 00:23:00] | М. Гусман | Ответа на второй вопрос я не знаю, но, поскольку Дмитрий является управляющим делами «ТАСС» и занимается финансами, он, конечно, заинтересован, чтобы остались одни машины и генеральный директор, и чтобы больше никого не было. С точки зрения сохранения средств это, наверное, путь в никуда.
[00:23:00 - 00:24:00] | С. Михайлов | Я думаю, что генеральный директор ему тоже не нужен.
[00:24:00 - 00:25:00] | М. Гусман | Он не настолько коварен, чтобы открыто говорить об этом. Что Вы скажете по первому вопросу, господин Сугита?
[00:25:00 - 00:26:00] | H. Sugita | The first question is what kind of technology we used. Not only the text? The voice and movies and that sort of thing? I am not familiar with the newest technologies that my company, Kyodo News, is using now, but my understanding is that we are trying to use all of the possible means, and we are trying to prove this is working for the improvement of journalism now. Specific technology, I am sorry, I do not have specific knowledge about that.
[00:26:00 - 00:27:00] | M. Kirk | I think that one of the ways to look at this is that one of the key initiatives that we have undertaken at our organization over the last few years, and it has been precipitated by our desire to get off the satellite as a mean of distributing content, is to make all of that content available in a digital format, whether that is text, photo, video, audio, interactive graphics, and the metadata associated with each one of those content types, to be able – and this is where the automation comes in again – to be associated with each other so that we can actually, in the simplest manner possible, build full packages, not just of text, but to have all of these pieces of content come together and make that either as automated a process as possible or make it very, very simple for our journalism teams to be able to do it. And that actually takes full advantage of how the story should in many ways be told in its fullness. I think in terms of specifics, we have actually dabbled with a few video technologies to see if we could automate video creation. We had an interesting experiment, and there are some tools – and I forget the name of the company now – where it would create a video, we did one and experimented with it, that involved a car manufacturer. Well it was basically scraping images from off the web and created a video out of it, but it in effect mis-told the story. So we couldn’t rely upon that piece of video, even though you might say it is an automated piece of content. When we looked at it we thought we couldn’t publish it, couldn’t turn it around, it was still too fragmented and didn’t necessarily provide the context around that piece of information, and I think it would have got us in trouble if we had ever published it. But the fact is that these tools are getting better, the metadata is getting more advanced, and I think before too long, we will be able to use these kinds of technologies and tools within our news-gathering process and our production process to actually scale up the volume of material that we could create. Question from the audience: Hello everybody. My name is Boris Bachorz from the AFP news agency. I would just like to amplify what John just said regarding algorithms. We all know that now we can have a very specific algorithm which would allow us to target our audience more efficiently. It is great from a purely commercial point of view. My question is to my colleagues and the audience: Is not there a risk, while feeding people with what they already like and with maybe what they already know, isn’t there a risk of limiting human interest, because we all know that curiosity is fed by things we do not know, that we are maybe not interested in. And isn’t there a risk at this stage of the algorithm taking the best part of human curiosity?
[00:27:00 - 00:28:00] | M. Gusman | Who wants to answer? Mr. Cerbone, you have to answer.
[00:28:00 - 00:29:00] | G. Cerbone | Aye, sir. Well I do not know how many of you were fans of Star Trek; I was, and whenever I saw Data, he always used to say, “I lack the emotional chip”, and I think that is the whole issue. We have to look at what kind of things we want to do. We want to do automations? It is hard, but we can do it. We want emotions? We want induction? We want reasoning beyond computation? Well, we are not there yet. From the audience: Hello, my name is Tariq Abdul Afar from the Middle East News Agency, the Egyptian news agency. My question is about the cost of modern technology. I think there will always be a technology gap between the big institutions and the small ones, or the media institutions in the West and in the South. The problem is, who can afford the technology cost? Most of the media institutions in developing countries suffer from financial difficulties that hinder their attempt to benefit or efficiently use the technology. Many of the news agencies, especially in developing countries, are being financed by the government, and such a government has priorities in spending. I think it can institute a problem, how to get or benefit from these technologies with economic or financial difficulties. Another issue related to the use of modern technology, especially in developing countries, is losing jobs. In many developing countries, they need to increase the GDP growth in order to find jobs, to avert unrest, but with the expansion of modern technology, many people can be laid off as a result of this. So this is a dilemma. How can we deal with this? Thank you.
[00:29:00 - 00:30:00] | M. Gusman | Clive, please.
[00:30:00 - 00:31:00] | C. Marshall | I think you have raised some very, very interesting philosophical questions. One positive note, I would say, is that if I look at the time that I have spent in the media, the cost of this new technology is now at the lowest it has ever been. So quite recently, if you wanted a new editorial system for a news agency, you would have to invest millions and millions of dollars. Today, with open source technology, that technology can be accessed at a far lower rate, and with social media and digital platforms, there are opportunities to reach larger and larger audiences with our content, so hopefully we can find new sources of revenue. But I think whatever the funding model and whatever the local situation, these are not easy businesses and this is not a particularly easy time for news organizations and news agencies in particular. But I think if we stay focused, we can be very optimistic. It has fallen to me to try and summarize the last hour. Mr. Cerbone, I think, wants to make one final comment.
[00:31:00 - 00:32:00] | G. Cerbone | I think the questions that the gentleman from Egypt raised are extremely important. One is innovation. The second one is job creation. The third one is investment and so forth. It is true what Clive was saying, the cost of technology now is the lowest that we have ever seen, but it is still too high for many people, on one side. First of all, can we do without? The answer is no. We cannot do without, because otherwise we will be further behind. Any one of us, you or me, it does not make any difference. We will be further behind. So what should we do? Can we afford a loan? The answer is no. Some can up to a point, but most can’t, because they simply do not have any resources for that. There is also a social responsibility that companies have: Can you invest in this stuff and not hire some people and give jobs where jobs are needed? So what is an answer, not the answer, there is no the answer, but what is an answer? An answer is working together. Companies have to start freeing up their closed walls, their high walls— not to bring them down, because we have to work in the interest of our company, but I think it is in the interest of everybody’s company to work together on certain issues. As long as rules are followed and set up by everybody and they are the same rules, so we are all playing the same game.
[00:32:00 - 00:33:00] | C. Marshall | Thank you, Giuseppe. So how do we pull together an hour of discussion in a couple of short sentences? The one common theme that has come through is that artificial intelligence is complementary to the work that we currently do, and I think that is a very optimistic message to take away from the session, that it will allow us to create more content, it will allow us to free up our journalists to do things that are far more interesting and to add value, that we can use it to crunch big data, and that the journalists can focus on adding value, on sentiment, and on creating far more interesting content for our readers, our viewers, and our listeners. I would add one word of warning in all of that, and that is that it sounds like we are going to be generating even more content in a world that already has far, far too much content, and where we are seeing the commercial models, the advertising models decline very rapidly because the amount of advertising inventory is almost unlimited, which is being combined with an almost unlimited amount of content that is being created. So at some point, and it is not for today’s session, we are going to have to find commercial models that will work in this new world of unlimited content, unlimited audiences. I would like to just end by thanking all of our panellists: John, Malcolm, Hiroki, Liu, and Giuseppe, and of course my co-moderator Mikhail Gusman as well. Thank you all for your participation as well.
[00:33:00 - 00:34:00] | М. Гусман | Я хотел бы присоединиться к словам Клайва: я тоже сохраняю оптимизм. Благодарю всех участников и вас, уважаемые гости, что нашли время принять участие в дискуссии. Спасибо всем! Давайте думать о том, как вместе создавать искусственный интеллект. Спасибо всем!
