[00:00:00 - 00:01:00] | В. Падалко | Спасибо. Уважаемые коллеги, продолжая мысли всех моих коллег, я хотел бы обратить ваше внимание на значение, которое во всем водовороте сегодняшних событий играет Российско-британская торговая палата. В этом году мы будем отмечать столетие этого института, и я думаю, вы согласитесь со мной, что сама по себе Палата — это светофор, который отражает текущие настроения в обществе, в бизнесе и в политике. Сегодня наша Российско-британская торговая палата показывает, наверно, желтый свет. Есть зеленый, который говорит о том, что у нас более-менее все благополучно, есть желтый предупреждающий, и есть красный, который показывает всем, что дальше уже будут другие рубежи. Мы в этом году с нашими британскими коллегами наметили целый ряд мероприятий, на наш взгляд, позволяющих немного сгладить те негативные моменты, которые сейчас отражаются на нашем сотрудничестве. В апреле наши коллеги в Лондоне провели первое такое значимое мероприятие, и, оказалось, что на тот торжественный прием, который был устроен по случаю Российско-британской палаты, регистрация завершилась на четырехсотом участнике. Мы стали формировать российскую делегацию в Лондон. Мы проведем деловой форум ранней осенью этого года и сейчас опасаемся, что самолет не вместит всех желающих, которые от российского бизнеса хотели бы полететь в Лондон и поговорить там с глазу на глаз с нашими коллегами. О чем это говорит? О том, что интерес к общению, к работе и к сотрудничеству с той и с другой стороны очень высок. На этом фоне у нас более чем на 40% сократился товарооборот, то есть наши контракты уменьшились более чем на 40% в 2015 году. Сейчас в первой половине 2016 года, как говорят коллеги, мы теряем темпы и еще процентов 13 потеряли от рубежей 2015 года. Все эти факторы заставляют нас, руководителей торгово-промышленных палат, и с той, и с другой стороны бить в барабаны и поднимать регионы в направлении двустороннего взаимодействия. Я уверен, что главные моменты, которые нам сейчас точно придется преодолеть, это, во-первых, помочь друг другу в информационном обеспечении. Во-вторых, в чистоте сделок с точки зрения финансов и закона. В-третьих, во всяком случае, со стороны Торгово-промышленной палаты, помочь всем британским компаниям, которые будут проявлять интерес к освоению российского рынка в регионах. Мы обещаем, что это направление для нас будет главным в работе с британцами. Спасибо. Roger Munnings: Thank you very much for that positive statement. You warm my heart with the prospect of more than one plane-full of Russian businesses coming to London in October, and we look forward to that, and encouraging further Russian investment into the UK. I’m now going to turn to the Right Honourable Charles Hendry, Minister of State for Energy and Climate Change in the UK between 2010 and 2012. In that role, of course, Charles got to know Russia pretty well because of Russia’s importance in the hydrocarbons. Charles, tell us about your perception of the energy industry and the economic circumstances today. Charles Hendry: Roger, thank you very much. I think it’s wonderful to be celebrating the 100th anniversary of the Chamber. If you go back a hundred years, I think it’s quite extraordinary that it was started at that time. It was halfway through the First World War, it was a year before the Revolution in Russia. And even in those extraordinarily difficult and challenging times, people were saying that we should be doing more trade and doing that in a more structured way. I think that the lessons for us is that the Chamber is there for the long term, it’s there to deliver dialogue, to develop trade and business relations, regardless of the political circumstances. On the energy side, there are three particular aspects to this. First of all, it relates to the interest of companies wishing to invest in Russia. We’ve got major British corporations like BP and Shell, which have been here for a significant period of time, who have founded a very positive relationship, and who are certainly keen to do more. I think it’s been clear that they have been able to bring complimentary skills, not just in terms of investment, of technology, of a commitment to health and safety and to environmental protection. Enabling Russia to harness its extraordinary resources in the way that it deems to be most appropriate. They are very much aware that it’s up to Russia to decide how it wishes to harness those resources, but also that it can expect not just to get revenue from that, but it can also quite rightly expect to get technology transfer, to get new skills, to get joint ventures in the supply chain as well. So, companies like BP and Shell are keen to do more. There are smaller companies which are keen to understand how they can be involved. There are companies in the supply chain which have grown up in the challenging circumstances of the North Sea and are keen to develop those skills around the world. More than a half of the subsea work comes back to British companies globally. So, an extraordinary skills base of companies which are keen to do more in that area, and which are very keen to look for joint ventures and local partnerships, so that they can assist in creating companies which have got those skills here in Russia as well. And more broadly in the energy sector, in the low-carbon sector, there are undoubtedly British companies which would be keen to understand Russia’s ambitions and to work with Russia in delivering on those. Secondly, I think it relates to companies who are keen be partners with Russia as it looks to export its gas. Europe is going to need Russian gas for as far out as we can see, there’s broad agreement on that. European energy security demands both that we see a diversification of sources of gas, and therefore bringing in gas from the Caspian and Azerbaijan is important in that respect, but also a diversification of roots I think is important for long-term security. And as Russia looks to how it can take that forward, then there are international organizations and British companies which are keen to be part of that process. I think that also means looking at the new roles which gas can play. And we know that the development of LNG as a transport fuel for lorries, for trucks and public transportation is an important market. And therefore working with Russia to develop a European-wide strategy for the implementation of LNG, following in the many ways the strategy being developed in the UK, is an important part of that aspect. The third element relates to framing the debate. There is more common ground than is widely believed between Russian and Europe on the long-term role for gas. I think we need to see a closer dialogue between the consuming countries for gas, and the supplying countries. You cannot have security of supply in Europe without having security of demand in Russia. There are two sides of the same coin. And I think we need to see a better dialogue about how those mutual interests can be served in the longer term. So, even in tough political times, the need for that dialogue becomes increasingly important and vital to understand. I think businesses which look at Russia will very often see the challenges, that the World Bank report on the ease of doing business is something that does need to be better understood. Just a few years ago Russia was 120th , this year I think it’s 51st , the ambition is to be in the top 20. And that shows their very strong commitment to reform. And so, developing that dialogue, doing it in a way that British companies can understand where those opportunities are, to understand where the investment is going to be most welcome, how joint ventures should work – I think this is a really important part of the work which the Chamber can play as it moves into its second century. Thank you. Roger Munnings: Charles, thank you. Certainly, this aspect of the need for cooperation between Europe and Russia, and indeed the rest of the world, on energy is fundamental. My colleagues at Lukoil would say that they don’t really see the other majors around the world as competitors, as they them as colleagues in the very difficult business of getting oil and gas out of difficult environments safely and for the benefit of populations. I think it’s always important to remember that, just as it is important to remember that throughout the Cold War, the contracts on gas between Europe and Russia were always honoured. So, thank you for those comments. You mentioned reform and the move up the table. It’s important that when people look at Russia, they understand that reform is not something new – fundamental, basic, long-lasting reform is not something that can be achieved overnight. It’s something that has to be constantly worked on. And we wish stamina to all the people involved in that in this country, because it’s a difficult area. Ben, can I move to you now? Benjamin Wegg-Prosser is Managing Partner of Global Counsel. Ben, tell us recent economic trends in business, and means of adaption to them in different sectors. Benjamin Wegg-Prosser: Thank you, Roger. I wanted this morning if I may to tell a short story about experiences of working on Russia-related issues. As a business we’re a regulatory and political risk consultancy. A small and modest part of our business was coming from Russia in the run-up to the crisis of 2013–2014. To be honest, I thought that when the crisis erupted in Crimea, business would come to an end. What was interesting was that that wasn’t the case. We discovered and noticed the countercyclical trend where large corporations, some British, some international with a big presence in London, were keen to understand in more detail the opportunities that were presented to them in Russia. And how, given the constrained political environment, they might be able to operate in a way that was fully compliant with the law, but was taking advantages of the opportunities that they saw. So, this work continued, and we wanted to understand it in more detail, so at the close of the last year we commissioned two significant pieces of research done in-house by our economic team led by a colleague who was a former chief economist at the British Foreign Office. What we’ve tried to do was take a sample of FTSE 100 as a proxy, slightly imperfect, but a proxy for the British economy as a whole, and to try to understand the trends within this counter-cyclical movement, as I described. Not surprisingly, we found that companies in the banking sector and energy had obviously scaled back their exposure to Russia. We wanted to try and understand this, not by looking at media coverage, not by looking at analysts or commentators, but just by looking at what companies had said themselves. So we went through their annual reports, their public statements, as the only sources that we were relying on. And as I said, in banking and energy there was clearly some drawback with companies leaving the market. But what was interesting was that, as we’ve heard from colleagues from GSK this morning, in areas like pharma, FMCG, we saw companies maintaining their interest in trading and working in Russia. And indeed, some of them were increasing that commitment. Pharma would be the most obvious, where companies were increasing their investment and looking to build their presence. So, the story one hears about doing business in Russia is more sophisticated and complicated than one might think. We then wanted to do a second piece of research, which we, in fact, published this week, looking at risk more widely. So, not simply looking at attitudes towards Russia, but looking at the attitudes that the FTSE 100 had, looking at risk right across the non-financial exposure. Again, what we found was not surprising. Russia was top of the list of risks for major British corporate companies like Marks & Spencer, WPP, Barclays, Schroders. They all flagged their exposure to Russia as being something that they felt was of material interest to their clients, to their shareholders, and they felt obliged to report that. But equally, they weren’t stating that they were leaving the market, they were simply more conscious and focused on the areas. So, this is something that we’ve reflected on, and I think that there are lessons for how to respond to the question we’re being asked today – how can we improve the trade and economic relationship between the two countries. I think it’s clearly to focus on the areas of strength within the British economy – life sciences, architecture, the creative industries all being good examples of that. But I think we also have to build on the processes that the Ambassador described about producing friction within a relationship. I think you’ve seen that for example – and I pay credit to the Ambassador in the audience – the way in which visas are now issued, in a much swifter and easier way for British companies looking to travel to Russia. I think it’s important. You’ve seen progress in tax, customs and other areas where British companies are able to operate in a slightly easier environment. Things are far from perfect, but they are improving. It’s also worth just to conclude: reflecting on the fact that culturally, socially, Britain and Russia over the course of the last twenty years since the end of the Cold War have formed such a close relationship, but equally such a fraught one. I think that’s down to two areas, and perhaps in this period of more constrained political times we might reflect on those two reasons and perhaps learn from them. I think that in the course of the last twenty years the relationship has been too extractive in the specific sense of the word. I think that as a whole, international businesses, Britain included, have viewed Russia too much as a place to extract value, most obviously in energy. And equally, I think Russian corporates have viewed London and in particular its financial centre, the capital market, as a place to extract value there too. And I think that a transactional relationship is something which I think we need to adapt and should evolve in these straitened times. I think the second area is that in many ways familiarity has bred contempt. And again, I think that as we live in tougher times, that is something we should reflect on. When the political situation improves, I think the relationship needs to be less extractive and slightly less contemptuous. Thank you, Roger. Roger Munnings: Ben, thank you for those very sharp insights. Certainly, when I was responsible for KPMG here, some of the success that we had was in absolutely making it clear we were investing in Russian people for the future. And we were not going to take profit out of the country, we were going to reinvest it. That I think always stood us in good stead. So, I take very well the point that you make. I also take well the point about British boards who find it difficult to run against the zeitgeist, when everything one hears in the UK on Russia in media terms is negative. And I address all members of the audience here who have investments in Russia and are British: please, tell people about your objective experience, good and bad, because the objective experience is quite different from that which brings fear when considering investments. Thank you very much for these points. Let me now move to Andrey Evgenyevich Bugrov, who is Senior Vice-President of INTERROS and also a Deputy Chairman of one of the jewels in Russia’s natural resource crown, Norilsk Nickel. Andrey, tell us about the perspective from your side, please. Андрей Бугров: Thank you. It is interesting: I have 5 minutes to talk about hundred years – not an easy task, of course. But basically when we talk about partnership and economic relations, we have some firmly embedded belief that that cooperation between the UK and Russia has a long history and is mutually beneficial. And one can also see that despite all the developments in the world, or around the world: business continues to cooperate, companies invest, our company’s trade with UK partners is pretty stable. What concerns me, and I cannot do anything about it, by the way, is that business cycles are different from political cycles, and sometimes I even feel they follow different orbits: political agendas are shorter and, say, limited, and thus this short-termism of political interests hinders the long-term objectives of business. For example, we all watch very closely developments in Ukraine, and try to assess the impact on the business, Similarly, I am concerned with the migration crisis in Europe and how that would affect my business partners there. I also watch closely issues related to Brexit Referendum. And all of the above forms a mutual agenda of equally important issues for dialogue and action. And we speak openly about that – we as business – so that our political bosses would be able to both hear and listen. What unites business interests around the world these days would be I think values. We used to say that economy is based on greed and fear. To a certain extent, the paradigm is changing now, and the issue of values and compatibility of business mentality becomes very important. Roger asked me to say a couple of words about corporate responsibility. And I have to say on the basis of personal experience and the companies that I worked for, that by and large on this particular issue we speak the same language, and in a way there are certain champions in this corporate responsibility issue in Russia, and I’ll be glad to share with you some of the information that we publish in the form of corporate responsibility annual reports. Lying next to it, or sitting next to it, would be the issue of transparency and anti-corruption. It is an important area of cooperation between the UK and Russian business based on the recent changes in the UK legislation and similar developments in the Russian landscape. And I have to tell you that we’ve come a very long way in order to get closer to international standards on both corporate responsibility and the issues of tackling corruption, and both Interros and Norilsk Nickel are amongst the most active participants in this process, and continue to be involved in a very important agenda on this issue that is being discussed by the G20 and B20. The Ambassador was mentioning the issue of culture, and we find it extremely important because both companies that I represent are well-known for their activities in the field of cultural exchanges, charity. And we are building up the best international experience available, and particularly the experience of the United Kingdom. We have a charitable foundation at Interros that works in close cooperation with the Charities Aid Foundation in the UK. The foundation supports proliferation of endowments in Russia based on the best international cases, and I repeat, including those from the United Kingdom. There is an endowment growth strategy programme that was launched three or four years ago. And we support the educational courses and other work for non-profits and NGOs that are spreading in the country quite profoundly. To give you a specific example, in May we had a very interesting meeting between the General Director of our art gallery and Martin Roth, who is the Director of Victoria and Albert Museum, and the discussion was on issues of cultural institutions as leaders of social development. And that was a very inspirational conversation and discussion because it gave some direction to business in terms of what to support, what to talk about, how to address those issues in our dialogue with both the UK and Russian authorities. So the question, Roger, that you posed was – what’s the assessment, I think more in terms of what can business do? I think we have – all of us have to be – more proactive with the existing framework and tools. They are in good working condition and should be used more actively. We should continue to use the capacities of business associations because that proved to be very result-oriented. And we should push Government officials for renewing high-level mechanisms, and those mechanisms exist mostly on paper today. But again, it’s a result of short-termism rather than profound understanding of global responsibility and long-term objectives for development. The political authorities have to speak to each other and try to find a common language in this regard. The business dialogue would be over-supportive of that work, and if we do not do that, we shall not succeed. And you may recall – and it is an opportune to quote Shakespeare today – that King Lear was saying to his daughter Cornelia: “Nothing will come of nothing. Speak again.” Now that’s what we do here today and would continue to be doing in all other forums. Thank you very much. Roger Munnings: Andrey, thank you for those insights. It became clear to me over a business career that the prime corporate social responsibility was to conduct your business in a way which took account of all of the people you touched in that business: your stakeholders, if you like: your shareholders, your suppliers, your customers, the environment in which you operate, the budgets to which you have responsibility. And through your leadership, and the Russian B20 involvement through your leadership, this creates such dialogue, so thank you for that and thank you for being part of the panel today. I’m going to move on to Viktor Mikhailovich Cherepov, who is Executive Vice-President of Russian Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs with whom the RBC has had a strong relationship for many years. As you all know, the RSPP represents nature business in this country and has been a driving force in Russia in the way that the conduct of business has developed over the past 20 years in my experience. Viktor Mikhailovich, you are going to speak about the potential of the medical and social sectors. We heard from GlaxoSmithKline, and I noticed that in the audience we have our colleagues from AstraZeneca, we have Jennie Younger, who is VP of Corporate Affairs. So please tell us about your perceptions.
[00:01:00 - 00:02:00] | В. Черепов | Спасибо, Роджер. Я, пожалуй, продолжу мысль господина Бугрова о том, что ныне существует много институтов, которые способствуют развитию отношений между Великобританией и Россией, и, конечно же, присоединяюсь к поздравлению всех с приближающимся столетним юбилеем Торгово-промышленной палаты России и Великобритании. Я хотел бы подчеркнуть, что РСПП как ведущее бизнес-сообщество Российской Федерации очень плотно сотрудничает со своей визави в Великобритании, CBI, и хотелось бы, чтобы в настоящее время эти отношения не стагнировали, а еще более активно развивались. Действительно, за столетний период развития наших отношений не только в рамках Российско-британской палаты, но и по другим направлениям, был накоплен значительный опыт, который сегодня в данных условиях, когда межправительственные соглашения иногда пробуксовывают, мог бы значительно пригодиться для решения назревших проблем. Мы ценим наше партнерство с Палатой, совместно прилагаем усилия для укрепления доверия, преодоления барьеров для взаимных инвестиций, локализации производства британских компаний в России. Для этого есть хорошие примеры: сегодня много упоминалась компания GlaxoSmithKline, но я хочу сказать, что и в этом году в Калужской области был открыт завод AstraZeneka. Надо сказать, что этот завод начинал строиться еще в 2011 году, когда отношения были не такими напряженными, как сейчас, и завод передовой технологии был построен, запущен в действие. По этому пути идет и компания GlaxoSmithKline, которая подписала замечательное соглашение по производству препаратов для лечения ВИЧ-инфекции и СПИДа, которые сейчас значительно приблизились к пороговым значениям эпидемии в Российской Федерации, это отметила даже министр здравоохранения Российской Федерации госпожа Скворцова, и много других примеров взаимодействия. Но здесь я хотел бы отметить, и это прозвучало во всех выступлениях, что присутствие британских компаний стало возможным благодаря созданию нормальных отношений и принятию нормативно-правовой базы, которая позволяет локализовать производство как фармацевтических компаний, так и компаний, которые занимаются производством медицинской техники, медицинских изделий. Примером тому может служить компания Smith&Nephew, которая купила завод в Подмосковье и будет производить изделия для травматологии и ортопедии. Надо сказать, что мы, анализируя в РСПП развитие этого процесса — локализации производства — отметили, что практически ни одна компания, ни английская, ни из Соединенных Штатов Америки, ни из Германии, не прекратила свое сотрудничество. Этому способствует принятие Постановления №102 по локализации производства, и мы создали конкурентную среду не только среди компаний иностранных и отечественных производителей, но и между иностранными производителями, которые производят уже локализованный отечественный продукт. Я бы поддержал мнение о том, что Россия является одной из четырех стран, которая активно занимается клиническими испытаниями, и это является базой для переноса новых медицинских технологий в практику практического здравоохранения, что, я думаю, принесет свои результаты. Первые результаты мы уже видим: это увеличение продолжительности жизни, снижение летальности и смертности в Российской Федерации за последние 6—10 лет. Но я бы отметил, что не только в области фармации и медицинской техники идет активное сотрудничество. Примерами такого сотрудничества является и создание новых технологий в области модернизации вертолетостроения, в частности, проект по вертолету К-226 с участием компании Rolls-Royce. Это и реконструкция Хабаровского НПЗ, это сотрудничество с КАМАЗом по двигателям и проекты в секторе общественного питания. Также есть примеры и выхода небольших российских компаний, но это уже первые ласточки, которые выходят и на рынок Великобритании. Особенно это касается IT-технологий и онлайн- технологий. Также многие английские компании заинтересованы в участии в строительстве инфраструктуры и спортивных объектов, которые будут использованы во время проведения чемпионата мира по футболу 2018 года, и это мы только приветствуем. Хотел бы отметить, что в настоящее время появился и единый рынок Европейского экономического союза, и налаживание связей британских компаний с единым рынком Европейского экономического союза было бы мощным двигателем налаживания взаимоотношений и с Россией в том числе. Поэтому РСПП через все перечисленные механизмы пытается создать не только нормативно- правовую базу, но и добрую атмосферу отношений между компаниями, между бизнес-объединениями для создания бизнес-среды, которая позволит расширять и производство, и сотрудничество во всех отраслях производства, и, как сегодня неоднократно подчеркивалось, в сфере культурного обмена, культурного сотрудничества и социального партнерства. Для этого у нас в РСПП существует международный совет по сотрудничеству и инвестициям, и надо сказать, что в этом совете очень активное участие принимает компания Ernst&Young, и особая благодарность им за это. Ну и в заключение: мне понравилось сравнение моего коллеги из Торгово- промышленной палаты, когда он рассказал про светофор. Я бы хотел пожелать, чтобы в результате сегодняшнего круглого стола уже загорелся мигающий желтый свет, как в современных светофорах, предупреждающий, что скоро зажжется зеленый свет. Спасибо. Roger Munnings: So, yes, let’s get it to “green” as quickly as we can. We’ve pretty much used up our time, I think I’ll just push our time limit a little bit to see if there’s anybody in the audience who wants to ask a question or make a comment. I can see the Russian Ambassador to the United Kingdom, and I wondered, Alexander Vladimirovich, if you wanted to say anything. You have been very helpful in focusing on trade and investment opportunities. If you want to leave it at that, I’m very happy. Do we have a microphone please?
[00:02:00 - 00:03:00] | А. Яковенко | Спасибо большое. Это была очень интересная дискуссия. Из нее я сделал два вывода. Первый вывод, и об этом говорил Андрей Бугров, такой: очень важно, чтобы экономические циклы совпадали с политическими и носили долгосрочный характер. Я думаю, что в интересах двух стран развивать экономическое сотрудничество. Это будет на благо наших народов. Но, естественно, для того, чтобы это делать, необходима политическая воля. На сегодняшний день мы, к сожалению, видим, что такой воли недостаточно. Я рассчитываю на то, что нам удастся в перспективе укрепить политическую волю к сотрудничеству с тем, чтобы мы могли не только восстановить двусторонний оборот, но и продвинуться значительно дальше. Я уверен, что все мы в этом заинтересованы, и я на это рассчитываю. Спасибо. Roger Munnings: Thank you very much, Alexander Vladimirovich. I think all of us in business who understand that the basis of business is having straightforward conversations about difficult issues and working on those issues through communication – all of us wish our political counterparts stamina in solving the political issues which are between us at the moment. I can see AstraZeneca. Do you want to make any comments? Tell us very quickly, Jennie, if you would, about investment in Kaluga. Jennie Younger: Hello. This is Jennie Younger, I’m Global Head of Corporate Affairs for AstraZeneca. We announced our investments about five years ago in Kaluga and we’ve invested about USD 224 million, which I think is the largest foreign investor in relation to construction of a new pharmaceutical facility in Russia. Our production started in March this year. We will be producing about thirty medicines that cover cardiovascular, respiratory and oncology products in particular. And we are now looking for further investment, we’re very committed to investing further and in providing the innovative medicines that we produce to the Russian population as much as we can. This is a really important market for us. And a shared goal between us needs to be this further progression of a localization strategy, so that we can be seen as a local provider for Russian people. One of the key elements of that relates to the conclusion of special investment contracts, and that’s what we are discussing with the Kaluga dignitaries and governors, etc. to help us to enable that next stage for our investment. So, thank you very much for everyone’s support and ongoing engagement. Roger Munnings: Thank you and congratulations on the investment. Ambassador, did you want to say a last word? Dr. Laurie Bristow: Thank you. I just wanted to say in closing today a very brief comment on the very important question which my colleague Ambassador Yakovenko raised about political will. He and I can debate – and we do debate – at very great length the detail of what keeps us busy all day on the political side. But I want to make a broader and I hope more positive point than that. There is a question as to how we got to where we are today. The bilateral relationship between Russia and the UK is difficult. We’re not alone in that. The UK follows shapes as part of a general EU response to a very severe shock that happened in our relations with Russia over the last two years. I don’t want to say any more than that on it. This is not a UK–Russia bilateral problem, there is a more general problem here for the EU, for the West, about how we build a relationship with Russia. The point I want to make is not that though. That’s a given and understood by all. The point I want to make is this: Russia is going through a political cycle. Elections this year, presidential elections shortly after that. The United States is going through a political cycle too. Germany, France are going through a political cycles. The world economy is going through a super-cycle. We in the UK have a very important decision to take next week, one of the most important decisions we will ever take. I’m not allowed to say any more than that, but everybody knows what this is. The point I want to leave the discussion with is actually an invitation to think about a point. Are we now are entering a transitional period after the shocks of the last two or three years? If so, what does that transition mean? What sort of relationship do we want to get to, between Russia and the UK, and between Russia and her European partners? What needs to happen for that to happen? Thank you. Roger Munnings: Ambassador, thank you. Let me just wrap up the session. Thank you to everybody for attending and taking part in sharing the 100th anniversary with us. I’d just like to reiterate that the political issues are very difficult ones, as we all understand, and we wish you and the governments of our countries and the European countries the best of stamina in sitting down, communicating, and dealing with these issues. Our business will continue, but we would be much happier if the relationships were much better. Thank you.
